INTRODUCTION TO 
A Shure Educational Publication
WIRELESS 
MICROPHONE 
SYSTEMS

Wireless Microphone Systems
INTRODUCTION TO WIRELESS 
MICROPHONE SYSTEMS
Table of Contents
Product Glossary........................................................ 4
Discover the components of a wireless system.
Concept Guide............................................................ 7
Understand the unique electronics that make wireless systems 
work and the features that help determine the right wireless 
options for you.
Needs Analysis......................................................... 11
A series of questions to assess wireless application 
possibilities and benefits for your performance situation.
Considerations.......................................................... 15
Signal path, receiver and antennae placement and battery 
information.
Conventional wired microphones convert sound into an 
electrical audio signal that is sent to the sound system 
through a cable. Live music stages that are crowded with 
cables from microphones for vocals, guitars, drums and 
other instruments can become a snake pit of overlapping 
wires.
Wireless microphones convert audio signals created 
by microphones into radio signals, which are sent by a 
transmitter through the air to a receiver. The receiver 
converts the radio signals back into audio signals which 
are then sent through the sound system. They eliminate 
the need for cables, so you’re no longer tethered to a 
sound system or tripping through messy performing 
environments.
With continuous technological advances and 
improvements in sound quality and reliability, wireless 
microphones are more affordable and popular than ever. 
Their potential uses go far beyond the stage. You can find 
wireless microphones in exercise studios, schools, houses 
of worship, presentation halls – anywhere a performer or 
presenter wants true freedom of movement.
SIMPLICITY
Set up and go for it. Your stage is cleaner and your 
mics are less intrusive, so you can concentrate on your 
performance.
MOBILITY
Be even more expressive. Wireless microphones cut you 
loose wherever you perform.
VERSATILITY
Multiple microphone choices, system configurations 
and features mean wireless systems can adapt to nearly 
anything you do and any place you go.
NO CABLES. NO WORRIES.

5
Wireless Microphone Systems
Wireless Microphone Systems range from simple to sophisticated. But they all include various combinations of            
these key components:
• Transmitters: Convert the audio signal from the microphone to a radio signal. There are two types:
 Handheld Microphone Transmitter – Combines handheld microphone element and transmitter in one unit.
 Bodypack Transmitter – Wearable unit with a connector that accepts microphones or guitar cables.
• Microphones (for Bodypack Transmitters): Headworn, lavalier and instrument microphones ideal for a variety of vocal 
and instrument applications
• Receivers: Modules that receive radio signals sent from transmitters and convert them back to audio.
PRODUCT GLOSSARY
Headworn Vocal Mic
Rugged, comfortable, easy-to-position headsets provide 
superior voice pickup in any active user setting.
Lavalier Vocal Mic
A range of sizes combine low visibility with high-quality 
professional audio. They provide full, clear sound for 
speech applications.
Clip-On Instrument Mic
A versatile solution for high volume wind, brass and 
percussion players. Gooseneck and clamp ensure 
secure fit and positioning.
Guitar/Bass Cable
Connects any guitar to a Bodypack for wireless 
performance.
TRANSMITTING
Two types of transmitters-handheld or bodypack – convert audio signals to radio signals 
so they can be sent, without a cable, to a wireless receiver at the mixing console.
Single Channel Receivers
This is the most common type of receiver. Receivers 
usually have XLR and ¼” audio outputs for connection 
to a variety of devices. Units may be free standing or 
rack-mountable and are typically AC-powered. Indicators 
for power and signal levels may be present. Diversity 
receivers utilize two antennas, which may be removable 
or permanently attached.
Multi-Channel Receivers
This type provides two or more channels of wireless, 
allowing multiple users to be wireless. These systems 
generally come with various transmitter combinations.  
Common options are dual or quad receivers.
RECEIVING
Wireless receivers convert RF signals sent from a Handheld Microphone Transmitter or a Bodypack 
Transmittter back to an audio signal. They come in these receiver configurations:
Portable Receivers
These resemble portable transmitters externally; they 
are characterized by small size; one or two outputs; 
minimal controls and indicators, and are typically battery 
powered. Portable receivers are great for mounting 
directly to a camcorder or DSLR camera. 
2
1
Handheld Microphone Transmitter
This microphone/transmitter integrates the transmitter 
into the microphone handle, so both functions are 
contained in one unit. 
Like conventional wired microphones, wireless 
handheld vocal microphones are tailored to meet 
diverse performance vocal requirements and musician 
preferences. Many different choices are available.
Bodypack Transmitter
Lavalier, Headworn and Instrument Microphones, 
as well as guitar cables, must plug into a Bodypack 
Transmitter to send their audio signals. Sleek, 
lightweight bodypacks can be easily clipped to clothing 
or a guitar strap.
Guitar Pedal Receiver
This receiver type is designed with the guitarist or bass 
player in mind.  It mounts on a pedal board, and can be 
powered by the pedal board itself.

7
Wireless Microphone Systems
CONCEPT GUIDE
SETUP: VOCALS
This wireless system setup example follows the wireless signal path for 
common vocal system configurations using a handheld microphone.
Application:
Profile | Handheld
A handheld wireless
setup is great for
performers who want
a handheld vocal
microphone that’s not
connected to a
bodypack transmitter.
Ideal for:
Vocalists
Speakers / Presenters
DJs
Analog or Digital
Analog systems utilize proven radio technology that 
offers quality audio performance and high channel 
count, even with entry-level systems. Digital systems 
feature exceptionally clear audio, but potentially fewer 
on-air channels. High-end digital systems, however, offer 
the best of both worlds, combining superb audio with 
the ability to use many wireless systems in crowded RF 
environments.
Frequency Ranges
Every wireless microphone system transmits and 
receives audio on a specific radio frequency, known as 
the operating frequency. These frequencies are typically 
divided into these bands, or ranges.
The UHF-TV Band – Unused television channels in this 
range are available for wireless microphones and other 
wireless audio devices. Most cities have a significant 
number of television stations and the largest cities 
may also have public safety operations, but there are 
sufficient unused television channels available for most 
wireless users to find a clear channel. However, this 
spectrum is becoming increasingly crowded. Users 
may be licensed or unlicensed in the UHF Band.
Multiple frequency range options are available throughout 
the UHF band, and the best one to use will vary from city 
to city. In order to determine the best range for your area, 
you may want to consult with the manufacturer.
The 900 MHz Range – This band (specifically, 902 – 
928 MHz) offers additional channels outside of the TV 
channel range. Users are allowed to operate without 
a license in this range. There are several high quality 
wireless microphone systems that operate in this range, 
most of them fully digital. While 900 MHz wireless 
microphone systems are legal to use in the United States 
(and most of the Americas), they are not necessarily legal 
to use in all parts of the world. Check with your local 
regulatory agency if you are unsure. 
The 2.4 GHz Band has attracted some interest for 
wireless microphone use. Advantages of this band 
are:  worldwide, license-free operation, and very short 
antennas, but there is some potential from interference 
from Wi-Fi devices. This band is great for users who only 
need a few channels of wireless, but for applications 
with many channels of wireless, the UHF-TV band may 
be preferred. 
Frequency Selection
Fixed Frequency – Fixed-frequency systems are pre-set 
to their operating frequency and cannot be changed by 
the user. They are suitable for use in one particular area 
or installation, but due to their limited capabilities are 
not commonly available anymore.  
Frequency Agile – Frequency-agile (tunable) systems 
allow users to quickly change frequencies to avoid local 
TV channels, other wireless users, or other interference 
sources. Most modern wireless microphone systems 
offer some degree of frequency agility. 
Tips! Many newer wireless systems include easy to 
use features, such as Scan and Sync which quickly 
and easily sets up the system with a clear channel. 
Some wireless manufacturers have online tools and 
resources such as wireless frequency finders to help 
users find the best frequency for their location.
Using Multiple Wireless Microphones
Each microphone needs its own frequency to operate 
and transmit properly. So it is not possible to use two 
wireless systems on the same frequency in the same 
venue or to use two wireless microphones with just one 
receiver (unless you are using a dual-channel receiver).
The individual frequency used by each microphone 
requires a certain amount of space within a particular 
frequency band. When two wireless systems are used 
together, the frequencies must be separated by some 
minimum amount that depends on the design of the 
system. If frequencies are set too close, microphones 
will compete with each other, and each system will 
experience noisy interference and/or sound dropouts.
As more transmitters and receivers are added to a 
particular setup, interaction between frequencies 
increases. This interaction produces more interfering 
frequencies that need to be avoided. More advanced 
wireless systems offer greater frequency selection, 
flexibility and the ability to combine more receivers 
and transmitters to serve more users. Many of these 
systems offer pre-configured groups of compatible 
frequencies to accommodate multiple users, as well 
as software that can scan for the clearest frequencies 
in any one particular location.
These technical and operating concepts help define how a wireless microphone system functions and which is best 
suited to a specific application.
Singer
Visit the Shure Wireless Frequency Finder for the most up to date 
frequencies for Shure Wireless System use in the United States. 
http://www.shure.com/americas/support/tools/wireless-frequency-finder

9
Wireless Microphone Systems
Polar Pattern
A polar pattern is the graphic representation of a 
microphone’s directional sensitivity, which is how a 
microphone picks up sound from different directions. 
These are the three most common polar patterns:
CARDIOID
These patterns pick up the most sound from in front of 
the microphone and some from the sides They are less 
susceptible to feedback in loud environments.
SUPERCARDIOID
These are tighter patterns that help screen unwanted 
sound sources. They are perfect for individual instruments 
in a multi-instrument setting or single sources in noisy 
environments. They also provide the best rejection of 
feedback when used with floor wedge monitor speakers.
OMNIDIRECTIONAL
Omnidirectional polar patterns are equally sensitive to 
sound from all directions. These are most often found in 
lavalier microphones.
Operating Principles
How a microphone changes sound into an electrical 
signal. This is determined by the type of Transducer 
inside the microphone. The two most common types are:
DYNAMIC
These are workhorse microphone elements with great 
sound that stand up to rugged regular use. They are also 
generally more affordable options.
CONDENSER
These produce a crisper, more defined sound and are 
better at capturing subtle details of delicate voices and 
instruments. They also require power to operate, which is 
supplied by the battery in a handheld wireless transmitter.
Application:
Profile | Lavalier
A lavalier microphone
and bodypack transmitter
setup can work for any
presenter or performer.
Application:
Profile | Headworn
For situations where
performers or presenters
work with louder sound
systems or use stage
monitor speakers, a
headworn microphone is
a more effective choice.
Ideal for:
Speakers / Presenters
Worship Leaders
Theater Stage Actors
SETUP: PRESENTER
This wireless system setup example follows the wireless signal path 
for common vocal system configurations using a lavalier microphone.
Microphone Basics
There’s more to a microphone than its shape. While invisible from the outside of a microphone, these two fundamental 
operating principles can help fine tune the selection of the right microphone for your wireless system application.
CONCEPT GUIDE
Wireless Receiver
Lavalier
Bodypack
Transmitter
Signal
transmitted
to Receiver
Presenter

11
Wireless Microphone Systems
Application
Configuration
Vocalist
Handheld Microphone /	 	
      
Transmitter
Singing Dancer
Singing Keyboardist 
Singing Drummer   
Fitness Instructor
Dance Instructor
Headworn Mic +
Bodypack Transmitter
Presenter
Worship Leader
Stage Actors
Lavalier Mic +
Bodypack Transmitter
OR
Headworn Mic +
Bodypack Transmitter
Horn | Percussion
Clip-On Mic +
Bodypack Transmitter
Guitar | Bass
Instrument Cable +	
	
	
Bodypack Transmitter
Application:
Profile | Guitar
A wireless guitar setup
helps guitarists move
freely anywhere
onstage. 
Ideal for:
Electric Guitarists
Acoustic Guitarists
Bass Guitarists
SETUP: GUITAR
This wireless system setup example follows the wireless 
signal path for common instrument system configurations.
NEEDS ANALYSIS
Microphone Configurations
Wireless system microphone and transmitter choices afford presenters and performers great flexibility in matching an 
application to a wireless configuration.
Would your performance benefit from a 
particular microphone design profile?
Your usage application is only one key factor in 
choosing a wireless microphone. Also consider the 
microphone transducer design and polar pattern. 
These greatly impact how any wireless microphone 
reproduces your live sound.
For example, if you are a vocalist who performs onstage with loud monitors, you might want a handheld 
transmitter with a tight supercardioid polar pattern to 
minimize feedback.
If you tend to sing softly, a condenser microphone will 
more smoothly capture the subtleties and details of 
your voice.
What type of microphone / transmitter 
configuration best fits your performance needs?
Bodypack
Transmitter
Guitar Cable links
to Bodypack
Signal
transmitted
to Receiver
Guitarist
Guitar Pedal Receiver
1
2

13
Wireless Microphone Systems
NEEDS ANALYSIS
System Configurations
Different transmitter and receiver options in every wireless system are also designed to respond to the special needs of 
different user applications.
Where do you intend to use your wireless 
system? One location? Many locations?
ONE LOCATION
If you intend to use the wireless system in one location, 
you simply need to make sure that you select a system 
that operates on frequencies compatible with your 
location’s available UHF broadcast TV channels, or 
operate on unlicensed frequencies.
MULTIPLE LOCATIONS
If you intend to use the wireless system in different 
cities, you will probably encounter different active TV 
channels. A frequency-agile wireless system lets you 
change frequencies to adapt to changing situations 
as you travel. Choose a system with Scan and Sync 
features, which will quickly and easily set up the 
system on a clear channel.
INTERNATIONAL LOCATIONS
The 2.4 GHz Band can be used internationally with no 
license requirement.
How many wireless systems will be in use at 
the time and location?
ONE SYSTEM
If you are operating a single wireless system in a 
location where there are no other wireless systems in 
use, you will not have any special multisystem needs to 
manage.
MULTIPLE SYSTEMS
If you operate more than one wireless system and move 
from venue to venue, it is usually more convenient to 
mount receivers in a small rack case. Some wireless 
systems allow two receivers to mount together in one 
rack space. These can be used with an antenna splitter 
that feeds one “master” pair of antennas to serve all 
receivers. 
There is a limit to the number of wireless systems 
that can be used in one location. Each system must 
transmit on its own frequency. And those frequencies 
must be selected carefully to prevent interference. 
Better wireless systems allow for more units to be 
operated at the same time without interference. 
Consult with the manufacturer for advice on ensuring 
multisystem operation.
Application:
Profile | Clip-On
A small, clip-on
instrument
microphone and
Bodypack Transmitter
is a great wireless
solution for many
acoustic instruments.
Ideal for:
Brass
Woodwind
Percussion
SETUP: INSTRUMENT
This wireless system setup example follows the wireless 
signal path for common instrument system configurations.
Wireless Receiver
Clip-On
Mic
Signal
transmitted
to Receiver
Bodypack
Transmitter
Instrument
Saxaphone
3
4

15
Wireless Microphone Systems
CONSIDERATIONS
RF SIGNALS
Signal path from transmitter to receiver
The signal path and signal strength between transmitter 
and receiver is affected not only by distance, but also 
by obstructions. Each installation location presents its 
own challenges.
Maintain line-of-sight between the transmitter and 
receiver antennas as much as possible. Avoid metal 
objects, walls, and large numbers of people between 
the receiving antenna and its associated transmitter. 
Ideally, this means that receiving antennas should be in 
the same room as the transmitters and elevated above 
the audience or other obstructions.
Receiver and antenna placement
PLACE THE RECEIVER PROPERLY
Receivers are subject to interference from external 
sources that emit radio frequencies. Where possible, 
keep receivers a few feet (or rack spaces) away from CD 
players, cell phones, digital special-effects units, and 
lighting boards, and other such devices.
POSITION ANTENNAS PROPERLY
Ideally, antennas should be positioned above an 
audience or other obstructions so that the transmitter 
and receiver can “see” one another. When receivers are 
mounted in a rack, antennas must be located on the 
front panel or allowed to project through the top of the 
rack. Antennas should be oriented vertically or angled 
apart to maximize the distance between antenna tips.
POWER
Batteries
Unlike most wired microphones, all wireless mic 
transmitters require batteries. As a result, batteries are 
an important and constant replacement part. If you 
are using non-rechargeable batteries, alkaline batteries 
offer the longest life for wireless applications. Off the 
shelf rechargeable batteries, such as nickel-cadmium 
or nickel-metal hydride, though an economical choice, 
typically last less than three hours before recharging is 
necessary. This short runtime makes them undesirable 
for most performers. 
Some manufacturers offer proprietary rechargeable 
batteries that utilize more advanced technology, such 
as lithium-ion, that will provide continuous usage that 
often surpasses that of alkaline batteries.
Application:
Profile | Headworn
For situations where
performers or presenters
work with louder sound
systems or use stage
monitor speakers, a
headworn microphone is
a more effective choice.
Ideal for:
Fitness / Dance
Instructors
Singing Dancers or
Instrumentalists (such
as drummers and
keyboardists)
SETUP: HEADWORN
This wireless system setup example follows the wireless signal path 
for common vocal system configurations using a headworn microphone.
Wireless Receiver
Headworn
Mic
Bodypack
Transmitter
Signal
transmitted
to Receiver
Instructor

LEARN MORE
Wireless Microphone Systems: Selection & Operation Guide
This booklet provides greater technical detail about specific wireless microphone systems, 
components, frequency selection, usage applications, setup suggestions and system expansion.
You can download a PDF of this guide at: 
http://www.shure.com/americas/support/downloads/publications
www.shure.com
Asia, Pacific:
Shure Asia Limited
22/F, 625 King’s Road
North Point, Island East
Hong Kong
Phone: +852-2893-4290
Fax: +852-2893-4055
Email: info@shure.com.hk
www.shureasia.com
United States, Canada, 
Latin America, Caribbean:
Shure Incorporated
5800 West Touhy Avenue
Niles, IL 60714-4608 USA
Phone: +1 847-600-2000
Fax: +1 847-600-1212 (USA)
Fax: +1 847-600-6446
Email: info@shure.com
www.shure.com
©2014 Shure Incorporated
Europe, Middle East, Africa:
Shure Europe GmbH
Jakob-Dieffenbacher-Str. 12,
75031 Eppingen, Germany
Phone: +49-7262-92490
Fax: +49-7262-9249114
Email: info@shure.de
www.shure.eu
Additional Shure educational publications available:
Audio Systems Guide for Houses of Worship
Audio Systems Guide for Video Production
Personal Monitor Systems | Introduction Guide
Mic Techniques for Music–Sound Reinforcement
Mic Techniques for Music–Recording
Introduction: Home Recording and Podcasting
AL27274          11/2014
