WIRELESS MICROPHONE SYSTEMS
By Tim Vear
Updated for digital wireless
A Shure Educational Publication
SELECTION 
AND OPERATION

WIRELESS MICROPHONE SYSTEMS
By Tim Vear
Updated for digital wireless
SELECTION 
AND OPERATION

Introduction ........................................................................ 4
Part One  
Wireless Microphone Systems: How They Work
Chapter 1
Basic Radio Principles ....................................................... 5
Radio Wave Transmission ........................................... 5
Radio Wave Modulation .............................................. 7
Chapter 2
Basic Radio Systems ......................................................... 8
System Description ..................................................... 8
Input Sources ............................................................. 8
Transmitter: General Description ................................. 9
Transmitter: Audio Circuitry ......................................... 10
Transmitter: Radio Circuitry ......................................... 11
Receiver: General Description ..................................... 12
Receiver: Radio Circuitry ............................................ 13
Receiver: Audio Circuitry ............................................. 14
Receiver: Squelch ....................................................... 14
Receiver: Antenna Configuration ................................ 15
Multipath .................................................................... 15
Receiver: Diversity Techniques ................................... 16
Antennas .................................................................... 18
Antenna Cable ............................................................ 20
Antenna Distribution ................................................... 21
Chapter 3
Wireless System Operation ................................................ 23
Frequency Bands for Wireless Systems ...................... 23 
VHF ............................................................................ 23
UHF ............................................................................ 25
NEW Why UHF? .................................................................. 26
Frequency Selection ................................................... 26
System Compatibility ................................................... 26
Operating Frequency Interactions: 
Intermodulation .......................................................... 26
Internal Frequency interactions: LO, IF, 
Crystal Multipliers ........................................................ 28
Non-System Radio Interference .................................. 30
Broadcast Television ................................................... 30
Wireless Systems in the Post-DTV Transition Era ........ 32
NEW White Space Devices .................................................. 33
Broadcast Radio ......................................................... 34
Other Radio Services .................................................. 34
Non-Broadcast Sources .............................................. 34
Range of Wireless Microphone Systems ..................... 35
Spread Spectrum Transmission .................................. 35
Digital Wireless Systems ............................................. 36
Operation of Wireless Systems Outside of the U.S. ..... 39
Part Two  
Wireless Microphone Systems: How To Make Them Work
Chapter 4
Wireless System Selection and Setup ............................... 40
System Selection ......................................................... 40
Crystal Controlled vs. Frequency Synthesis ................. 41
System Setup: Transmitter........................................... 41
System Setup: Receivers ............................................. 43
System Setup: Receiver Antennas............................... 45
System Setup: Batteries............................................... 46
System Checkout and Operation ................................. 47
Computer-Controlled Wireless Systems ....................... 48
NEW “Intelligent” Wireless Systems...................................... 48
Troubleshooting Wireless Microphone Systems........... 49
Troubleshooting Guide ................................................ 49
Chapter 5
Application Notes ............................................................... 50
Presenters.................................................................... 50
Musical Instruments.................................................... 50
Vocalists....................................................................... 51
Aerobic/Dance Instruction ........................................... 52
Theater ........................................................................ 52
Worship........................................................................ 53
Bingo ........................................................................... 53
Film/Videography......................................................... 54
Broadcast .................................................................... 54
Point-to-Point Wireless................................................. 55
Conclusion................................................................... 58
Reference Information
Appendix A: Calculation of 
Intermodulation Products ........................................... 59
Appendix B: U.S. Television Channels ........................ 61
Glossary of Terms and Specifications .......................... 62
Included Illustrations ................................................... 65
Biography ................................................................... 66
3
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Wireless
Ta ble of Contents

 Introduction
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Introduction
4
In the 60 years since their introduction, wireless microphone
systems have developed from experimental devices to the
present range of proven technologies. At the same time their
use has evolved from a mere performance novelty to 
a universal feature in productions of every type. Finally, 
a steadily improving ratio of performance vs. cost has 
ultimately made the wireless microphone as affordable 
as it is reliable.
However, even as wireless products have become more
capable and accessible, they are being used in ever more
complex applications. In addition, the radio environment
has become much more crowded and problematic than
before. Advances such as digital technology have helped
to meet these changing requirements, but challenges are
likely to increase. As a result, even simple wireless 
microphone applications must be designed and installed
with care to insure their successful operation.  
The scope of this guide is limited to wireless systems used
primarily in audio applications. Although most of the 
examples are given in terms of wireless microphones, the
same radio and audio principles apply to wireless in-ear
monitors, wireless intercoms, and other similar audio transmission systems. The reader is presumed to be somewhat
familiar with typical audio systems. However, while there are
some similarities between sound transmission and radio
transmission, many of the characteristics of radio systems
are neither analogous to audio systems nor intuitive to the
audio engineer. Therefore, some necessary basic radio 
principles are included in the presentation.
The purpose of this guide is to provide the interested
reader with adequate information to select suitable wireless
equipment for a given application and to use that 
equipment successfully. In addition, it is hoped that the
fundamentals presented here will equip regular users 
of wireless with a framework to assist in their further 
understanding of this evolving technology.
This guide is presented in two parts: how wireless 
microphone systems work and how to make wireless 
microphone systems work. The first part is a technical 
introduction to the basic principles of radio and to the 
characteristics of wireless transmitters and receivers. 
The second part discusses the practical selection and 
operation of wireless microphone systems for general and
specific applications. The two parts are intended to be 
self-contained. The first part should be of interest to those
who specify or integrate professional wireless equipment
while the second part should be of use to anyone who 
regularly works with wireless microphone systems.

CHAPTER ONE
BASIC RADIO PRINCIPLES
Radio Wave Transmission
Radio refers to a class of time-varying electromagnetic
fields created by varying voltages and/or currents in 
certain physical sources. These sources may be "artificial,"
such as electrical power and electronic circuits, or "natural,"
such as the atmosphere (lightning) and stars (sunspots).
The electromagnetic field variations radiate outward from the
source forming a pattern called a radio wave.  Thus, a radio
wave is a series of electromagnetic field variations travelling
through space. Although, technically, any varying source of
voltage or current produces a varying field near the source,
here the term "radio wave" describes field variations that
propagate a significant distance away from the source.
A sound wave has only a single "field" component (air 
pressure).  Variations in this component create a pattern of
air pressure changes along the direction the sound wave
travels but otherwise have no particular orientation. 
In contrast, a radio wave includes both an electric field 
component and a magnetic field component.  The variations
in these components have the same relative pattern along
the direction the radio wave travels but they are oriented at
a 90 degree angle to each other as illustrated in Figure 1-1.
In particular, it is the orientation of the electric field 
component which determines the angle of "polarization" of
the radio wave. This becomes especially important in the
design and operation of antennas.
Like sound waves, a radio wave can be described by its
frequency and its amplitude. The frequency of a radio
wave is the time rate of the field variations measured in
Hertz (Hz), where 1 Hz equals 1 cycle-per-second. The
radio spectrum, or range of frequencies, extends from a
few Hertz through the Kilohertz (KHz) and Megahertz
(MHz) ranges, to beyond the Gigahertz (GHz) range. The
suffixes KHz, MHz, and GHz refer to thousands, millions,
and billions of cycles-per-second respectively. As far as is
presently known, humans are directly sensitive to radio
waves only at frequencies in the range of a few million GHz,
which are perceived as visible light, and at those 
frequencies in the range just below visible light, which are
perceived as heat (infrared radiation). The overall radio
spectrum includes both natural and artificial sources as 
indicated by Figure 1-2.  
The amplitude of a radio wave is the magnitude of the
field variations. It is the characteristic that determines the
"strength" of the radio wave. Specifically, it is defined to be
the amplitude of the electric field variation. It is measured
in volts per unit length and ranges from nanovolts/meter
(nV/m) to kilovolts/meter (KV/m), where nV refers to one
billionth of a volt and KV refers to one thousand volts.  
The minimum level required for pickup by a typical radio
receiver is only a few tens of microvolts (uV, a millionth 
of a volt) but much higher levels can be found near 
transmitters and other sources. The wide range of radio
wave amplitudes that may be encountered in typical 
applications requires great care in the design and use of
wireless microphone systems, particularly receivers.  
Another characteristic of waves, related to frequency, is
wavelength.  The wavelength is the physical distance 
between the start of one cycle and the start of the next cycle
as the wave moves through space. Wavelength is related 
to frequency by the speed at which the wave 
travels through a given medium. This relationship is 
expressed in the wave equation, which states that the speed
of the wave is always equal to the product of the 
frequency times the wavelength.  The wave equation applies to any physical wave phenomenon such as radio
waves, sound waves, seismic waves, etc. (See Figure 1-3.) 
The speed of radio waves (through a vacuum) is equal
to approximately 3 x 108 meter/second, or about 186,000
miles/second.  This is also known as the "speed of light,"
since light is just one part of the radio spectrum.  The wave
equation states that the frequency of a radio wave, 
multiplied by its wavelength always equals the speed of
5
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
PART ONE: Wireless Microphone Systems: How They Work
x
y
Magnetic Field
Electric Field
Figure 1-1: radio wave
Figure 1-2: frequency vs. wavelength

Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
6
light.  Thus, the higher the radio frequency, the shorter the
wavelength, and the lower the frequency, the longer the
wavelength. Typical wavelengths for certain radio 
frequencies are given in Figure 1-3. Wavelength also has
important consequences for the design and use of wireless 
microphone systems, particularly for antennas.  
Unlike sound, radio waves do not require a physical 
substance (such as air) for transmission. In fact, they 
"propagate" or travel most efficiently through the vacuum of
space. However, the speed of radio waves is somewhat
slower when travelling through a medium other than 
vacuum. For example, visible light travels more slowly
through glass than through air. This effect accounts for the
"refraction" or bending of light by a lens. Radio waves can
also be affected by the size and composition of objects in
their path.  In particular, they can be reflected by metal objects
if the size of the object is comparable to or greater than the
wavelength of the radio wave. Large surfaces can reflect
both low frequency (long wavelength) and high frequency
(short wavelength) waves, but small surfaces can reflect only
high frequency (short) radio waves. (See Figure 1-5.)
Interestingly, a reflecting metal object can be porous,
that is, it can have holes or spaces in it. As long as the
holes are much smaller than the wavelength, the metal
surface will behave as if it were solid. This means that
screens, grids, bars, or other metal arrays can reflect radio
waves whose wavelength is greater than the space 
between the array elements and less than the overall array
size. If the space between elements is larger than the
wavelength, the radio waves will pass through the array.
For example, the metal grid on the glass door of a 
microwave oven reflects microwaves back into the oven
but allows light waves to pass through so that the inside is
visible. This is because microwaves have a wavelength of
at least one centimeter while visible light has a wavelength
of only one-millionth of a meter.  (See Figure 1-4)
Even metal objects that are somewhat smaller than the
wavelength are able to bend or "diffract" radio waves. 
Generally, the size, location, and quantity of metal in the
vicinity of radio waves will have significant effect on their 
behavior. Non-metallic substances (including air) do not 
reflect radio waves but are not completely transparent either.
To some degree, they generally "attenuate" or cause a loss
in the strength of radio waves that pass through them. The
amount of attenuation or loss is a function of the thickness
and composition of the material and also a function of the
radio wavelength. In practice, dense materials produce
more losses than lighter materials and long radio waves (low
frequencies) can propagate greater distances through
"lossy" materials than short radio waves (high frequencies).
The human body causes significant losses to short radio
waves passing through it. 
An object that is large enough to reflect radio waves or
dense enough to attenuate them can create a "shadow" in
the path of the waves which can greatly hamper reception
of radio in the area beyond the object.  
A final parallel between sound waves and radio waves
lies in the nature of the overall radio wave pattern or "field"
produced by various sources at a given location. If 
reflections are present (which is nearly always the case indoors), the radio field will include both direct waves
(those that travel by the shortest path from the
source to the location) and indirect waves (those
that are reflected). Radio waves, like sound waves,
become weaker as they travel away from their
source, at a rate governed by the inverse-square
law: at twice the distance, the strength is decreased
by a factor of four (the square of two). The strength
of radio waves that arrive at a given location, by 
direct or indirect paths, is equal to the strength of
Wavelength
Figure 1-5: propagation: wavelength vs. obstacles.
Figure 1-3: the wave equation
Figure 1-4: propagation: wavelength vs. openings.

7
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
the original source(s) minus the amount of loss due to 
distance (inverse square loss),  loss due to material 
attenuation, and loss due to reflections.
After many reflections radio waves become weaker and
essentially non-directional. They ultimately contribute to 
ambient radio "noise," that is, general radio energy produced
by many natural and man-made sources across a wide
range of frequencies. The strength of ambient radio noise is
relatively constant in a given area, that is, it does not diminish
with distance. The total radio field at a given location consists
of direct waves, indirect waves and radio noise.  
Radio noise is nearly always considered to be 
undesirable. The direct and indirect waves may come from
both the desired source (the intended transmission) and
undesirable sources (other transmissions and general radio
energy emitters). Successful radio reception depends on a
favorable level of the desired transmission compared to the
level of undesirable transmissions and noise.
Radio Wave Modulation
This discussion of radio transmission has so far dealt
only with the basic radio wave. It is also necessary to 
consider how information is carried by these waves. Audio
"information" is transmitted by sound waves which consist of
air pressure variations over a large range of amplitudes and
frequencies. This combination of varying amplitudes and
varying frequencies creates a highly complex sound field.
These varying pressure waves are able to be processed 
directly by our auditory systems to perceive speech, music,
and other intelligible sounds (information).  
Radio "information" is generally transmitted using only
one frequency. This single electromagnetic wave is varied in
amplitude, frequency, or some other characteristic (such as
phase) and for most radio transmissions neither the wave
nor its variation can be detected or processed directly by
human senses. In fact, the wave itself is not the information
but rather the "carrier" of the information. The information is
actually contained in the amplitude variation or frequency
variation, for example. When a radio wave contains 
information it is called a radio "signal." The  general term for
this information-carrying variation of radio
waves is "modulation." If the amplitude of the
wave is varied the technique is called Amplitude
Modulation or AM. If the frequency is varied, 
it is called Frequency Modulation or FM. If the
phase is varied, it is called Phase Modulation 
or PM.
The amount of information that can be 
carried in a radio signal depends on the type of
modulation and the level of modulation that can
be applied to the basic radio wave. It also 
depends on the frequency of the basic radio wave. These
factors are limited by physics to some extent, but are also
limited by regulatory agencies such as the FCC.  For AM signals, the radio wave has a single (constant) frequency of
some basic amplitude (determined by the transmitter
power). This amplitude is varied up and down (modulated)
by the audio signal to create the corresponding radio signal.
The rate of modulation is equal to the frequency of the audio
signal and the amount of modulation is proportional to the
amplitude (loudness) of the audio signal. The maximum
(legal) amount of amplitude modulation allows an audio signal of only limited frequency response (about 50-9000 Hz)
and limited dynamic range (about 50 dB).  (See Figure 1-6.)
For FM signals, the radio wave has a constant amplitude
(again determined by transmitter power) and a basic 
frequency. The basic radio frequency is varied up and down
(modulated) by the audio signal to create the corresponding
radio signal. This frequency modulation is called "deviation"
since it causes the carrier to deviate up and down from its
basic or unmodulated frequency. (See Figure 1-7.)
As with an AM signal, the rate of modulation is equal to
the audio frequency and the amount of modulation is equal
to the audio amplitude. Typical values of deviation in FM
wireless microphone systems range from about 12KHz to
45KHz depending on the operating frequency band. The
maximum (legal) amount of deviation allows an audio signal
of greater frequency response (about 50-15,000 Hz) and
greater dynamic range (more than 90 dB) than does AM.  
Although the details of wireless microphone transmitters
and receivers will be covered in the next section, it should
be noted here that all of the systems discussed in this 
presentation use the FM technique. The reasons for this
are the same as are apparent in commercial broadcast
systems. More "information" can be sent in the typical 
FM signal, allowing higher fidelity audio signals to be 
transmitted.  In addition, FM receivers are inherently less
sensitive to many common sources of radio noise, such as
lightning and electrical power equipment. These sources
are characterized by a high level of AM-type noise which
is rejected by FM systems.  
Figure 1-6: amplitude modulation (AM)
Figure 1-7: frequency modulation (FM)

CHAPTER TWO
BASIC RADIO SYSTEMS
System Description
The function of a radio or "wireless" system is to send 
information in the form of a radio signal. In this presentation,
the information is assumed to be an audio signal, but of
course video, data, or control signals can all be sent via radio
waves. In each case, the information must be converted to
a radio signal, transmitted, received, and converted back to
its original form. The initial conversion consists of using the
original information to create a radio signal by "modulating"
a basic radio wave. In the final conversion, a complementary
technique is used to "demodulate" the radio signal to 
recover the original information. 
A wireless microphone system consists generally of 
three main components:  an input source, a transmitter, and
a receiver. (See Figure 2-1.) The input source provides an
audio signal to the transmitter. The transmitter converts the
audio signal to a radio signal and "broadcasts"or transmits it
to the surrounding area.  The receiver"picks up" or receives
the radio signal and converts it back into an audio signal.
Additional system components include antennas and, 
possibly, antenna cables and distribution systems. The
processes and the basic components are functionally similar to commercial radio and television and other forms of
radio communications.  What differs is the component scale
and the physical system configurations.  
There are four basic configurations of wireless 
microphone systems, related to the mobility of the 
transmitter and receiver components, as required for 
different applications.  The first configuration involves a
portable transmitter and a stationary receiver. The 
transmitter is usually carried by the user, who is free to
move about, while the receiver is located in a fixed position.
The input source in this setup is normally a microphone or
an electronic musical instrument. The receiver output is
typically sent to a sound system, recording equipment, or
a broadcast system. This is the configuration of the 
standard "wireless microphone" and is the arrangement
most widely used in entertainment, public address, and
broadcast applications.  
The second configuration employs a stationary 
transmitter and a portable receiver. In this case, the user
carries the receiver, while the transmitter is fixed.  The input
source to the transmitter for these setups is usually a
sound system, playback system, or other installed source.  
The output of the receiver is typically monitored through
headphones or loudspeakers. It may feed a portable 
audio or video recorder. This is the configuration of 
wireless systems for in-ear-monitors, (IEMs) interruptible 
foldback systems (IFB), assistive listening, simultaneous
translation, and various instructional uses.  It is also, of
course, the configuration of commercial radio and 
television broadcast systems when the receiver is mobile
such as a personal radio or a car radio.  
The third configuration consists of both a portable 
transmitter and a portable receiver. The users of both 
components are free to move about. Again, the input source
is usually a microphone and the output is often 
a headphone. This is the configuration of "wireless intercom"
systems, though each user in a typical setup has both a
transmitter and a receiver for two-way communication. 
Another application of this configuration is for transmission
of audio from a wireless microphone to a portable camera/recorder in broadcast, film, and videography.
The fourth configuration comprises a transmitter and a
receiver that are each stationary. Such setups are often 
referred to as "point-to-point" wireless systems. The typical
input would be a playback source or mixer while the output
might be to a sound system or to a broadcast facility. 
Examples of this setup are wireless audio feeds to multiple
amplifier/loudspeaker arrays for temporary distributed
sound systems, radio remote-to-studio links and of course
commercial and non-commercial broadcasts from fixed
transmitters to fixed receivers. 
Input Sources
The input source is any device that provides a suitable
audio signal to the transmitter. "Suitable audio signal"
means an electrical signal within a certain frequency range
(audio), voltage range (microphone level or line level), and
impedance range (low or high) that can be handled by the
transmitter. Though this places some limits on input
sources, it will be seen that almost any type of audio 
signal can be used with one system or another.  
The most common input source is a microphone,
which may take any one of a variety of forms:  handheld,
lavaliere, headworn, instrument-mounted, etc. The audio
Figure 2-1: general radio system diagram
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
8

signal provided by this source is audio frequency, 
microphone level, and usually low impedance.  Since the
"wireless" part of the wireless microphone only serves to
replace the cable, ideally, the characteristics and performance of a particular microphone should not change when
used as part of a wireless microphone system.  
Therefore, the selection of microphone type for a 
wireless microphone system should be made following the
same guidelines as for wired microphones.  The usual choices
of operating principle (dynamic/condenser), frequency 
response (flat/shaped), directionality (omnidirectional/
unidirectional), electrical output (balanced/ unbalanced,
low or high impedance), and physical design (size, shape,
mounting, etc.) must still be made correctly.  Problems that
result from improper microphone choice will only be 
aggravated in a wireless application.  
Another widely encountered input source is an 
electronic musical instrument, such as an electric guitar,
electric bass, or portable electronic keyboard.  The signal
from these sources is again audio frequency, microphone
or line level, and usually high impedance.  The potentially
higher signal levels and high impedances can affect 
transmitter choice and operation.  
Finally, general audio signal sources such as mixer outputs, cassette or CD players, etc. may be considered. These
exhibit a wide range of levels and impedances.  However, as
long as these characteristics are within the input capabilities of the transmitter they may be successfully used.
Transmitter: General Description
Transmitters can be either fixed or portable as 
mentioned earlier.  Regardless of type, transmitters usually
feature a single audio input (line or microphone type), 
minimal controls and indicators (power, audio gain 
adjustment) and a single antenna.  Internally, they are also 
functionally the same, except for the power supply: AC
power for fixed types and battery power for portable 
models. The important features of transmitter design will be
presented in the context of portable units.  
Portable transmitters are available in three different
forms:  bodypack, handheld, and plug-on. (See Figure 2-2.)
Each of these has further variations of inputs, controls, 
indicators, and antennas.  The choice of transmitter type 
is often dictated by the choice of input source:  handheld
microphones usually require handheld or plug-on transmitters
while nearly all other sources are used with bodypack types. 
Bodypack (sometimes called beltpack) transmitters are
typically packaged in a shirt-pocket sized rectangular housing.
They are often provided with a clip that secures to clothing
or belt, or may be placed in a pocket or pouch. In theater
and some other applications they may be concealed 
underneath clothing.  Input is made from the source to the
bodypack via a cable, which may be permanently attached
or detachable at a connector.  This connector may allow a
variety of input sources to be used with one transmitter.  
Bodypack transmitter controls include at least a power
switch and often a separate mute switch, allowing the
audio input to be silenced without interrupting the radio
signal. Other controls may include gain adjustment, 
attenuators, limiters and, in tuneable systems, a provision
for frequency selection.  Indicators (usually LED’s) for
power-on and battery condition are desirable, while tuneable units sometimes include digital readouts of frequency.
A few transmitters are equipped with audio "peak" 
indicators.  Finally, the antenna for a bodypack transmitter
may be in the form of a flexible attached wire, a short 
"rubber ducky" type, or the input source cable itself, such
as a guitar cable or lavaliere microphone cable.
Handheld transmitters, as the name implies, consist of
a handheld vocal microphone element integrated with a
transmitter built into the handle. The complete package
appears only slightly larger than a wired handheld 
microphone.  It may be carried in the hand or mounted on
a microphone stand using an appropriate swivel adapter.
Input from the microphone element is direct via an internal
connector or wires. Some models have removable or 
interchangeable microphone elements.  
Handheld transmitter controls are generally limited to
a power switch, a mute switch, and gain adjustment.
Again, tuneable models include some provision for 
frequency selection. Indicators are comparable to those in
bodypack transmitters: power status, battery condition, 
frequency. Handheld transmitter antennas are usually 
concealed internally, though certain types (primarily UHF)
may use a short external antenna.  
"Plug-on" 
transmitters are a
special type designed
to attach directly to a
typical handheld 
microphone, 
effectively allowing
many standard 
microphones to 
become "wireless."
The transmitter is
contained in a small
rectangular or 
cylindrical housing
with an integral 
female XLR-type
input connector. 
Figure 2-2: examples of transmitters 
(left to right: handheld, bodypack, plug-on)
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
9

Controls and indicators are comparable to those found in
bodypack types and the antenna is usually internal.  
Miniaturization of components has also resulted in a
class of transmitters that are integrated directly into 
headworn microphones and lapel microphones as well as
units that can plug directly into the output connector of an
electric guitar. The trend toward smaller and more highly 
integrated devices is certain to continue.  
While transmitters vary considerably in their external 
appearance, internally they all must accomplish the same
task:  use the input audio signal to modulate a radio 
carrier and transmit the resulting radio signal effectively.
Though there are many different ways to engineer wireless
transmitters, certain functional elements are common to
most current designs. It is useful to describe these 
elements to gain some insight to the overall performance
and use of wireless microphone systems. (See Figure 2-3.)  
Transmitter: Audio Circuitry
The first part of the typical transmitter is the input 
circuitry. This section makes the proper electrical match 
between the input source and the rest of the transmitter.  It
must handle the expected range of input levels and present
the correct impedance to the source. Gain controls and 
impedance switches allow greater flexibility in some designs.
In certain cases, the input circuitry also provides electrical
power to the source (for condenser microphone elements).  
The signal from the input stage passes to the signal 
processing section, which optimizes the audio signal 
in several ways for the constraints imposed by radio 
transmission. The first process is a special equalization
called pre-emphasis, which is designed to minimize the 
apparent level of high frequency noise (hiss) that is 
unavoidably added during the FM transmission. The 
"emphasis" is a specifically tailored boost of the high 
frequencies. When this is coupled with an equal (but 
opposite) "de-emphasis" in the receiver, the effect is to 
reduce high frequency noise by up to 30 dB. (See Figures
2-4 a & b.)  
The second process is called "companding" 
(compress/ expand), which is designed to compensate 
for the limited dynamic range of radio transmission. The 
part of the process performed in the transmitter is 
"compression," in which the dynamic range of the audio
signal is reduced or compressed, typically by a fixed ratio
of 2:1. Again, when this is coupled with an equal but 
opposite (1:2) "expansion" of the signal in the receiver, the
original dynamic range of the audio signal is restored. A
voltage-controlled-amplifier (VCA) is the circuit element
that provides both dynamic functions: gain is decreased in
the compressor mode and increased in the expander
mode. The gain change is proportional to the signal level
change. Nearly all current wireless microphone systems
employ some form of companding, allowing a potential 
dynamic range greater than 100 dB. (See Figure 2-5a.)  
A variation that is found in a few compander designs is
to divide the audio signal into two or more frequency bands.
Each band is then pre-emphasized and compressed 
independently. In the receiver, de-emphasis and expansion
are applied separately to these same bands before 
combining them back into a full-range audio signal.  Though
more expensive, multi-band companding systems may
have a better ability to improve dynamic range and apparent
signal-to-noise ratio across the entire audio range.
A limitation of fixed-ratio companders is that the same
amount of signal processing is applied regardless of signal
level. Dynamics processors perform compression or 
10
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Figure 2-3: general transmitter block diagram
Figure 2-4b: de-emphasis in receiver
Figure 2-4a: pre-emphasis in transmitter

expansion functions based on an evaluation of the "average"
signal level, which fluctuates continuously. Because this
process is not instantaneous, the compander action is not
completely transparent. With good design, audible "artifacts"
are minimal but may become more apparent when the 
signal level is extremely low. This accounts for occasional
"modulation" noise or background noise intrusion that 
accompanies low-level audio signals, especially when the
radio signal itself is weak or noisy.
The performance of full-band companding systems
can be improved by first optimizing the measurement of
the average signal level. A "true RMS" detector is preferred,
since this technique most closely tracks the amplitude of
a full range audio signal, regardless of frequency response.
Further improvement can be realized by using leveldependent companding. For low level audio signals, little
or no processing is applied so there are no audible effects.
As the audio signal level increases, processing levels 
are increased, so that potentially audible artifacts are 
masked. Implementation of this scheme requires a high 
performance VCA and close tolerance in the audio sections
of transmitters and receivers. (See Figure 2-5b.)    
In many transmitters, an additional process called 
limiting is applied to the audio signal. This is to prevent overload and distortion in subsequent audio stages or to prevent
"overmodulation" (excessive frequency deviation) of the
radio signal. The "limiter" automatically prevents the audio
signal level from exceeding some preset maximum level and
is usually applied after pre-emphasis and companding.
The audio processing described here is generally done
with analog circuitry. It is also possible to implement 
companding using digital signal processing (DSP). These
"hybrid" systems transmit an analog RF signal but the
audio path in the transmitter and/or receiver passes
through DSP circuitry.
Transmitter: Radio Circuitry
After processing, the audio signal is sent to a 
voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO). This is the section that
actually converts the audio signal to a radio signal by the
technique called frequency modulation (FM). The (relatively)
low frequency audio signal controls a high frequency 
oscillator to produce a radio signal whose frequency 
"modulates" or varies in direct proportion to the audio signal. 
The maximum value of modulation is called the 
deviation and is specified in kilohertz (KHz). The amount
of deviation produced by the audio signal is a function of
the design of the transmitter. Systems with deviation greater
than the modulating frequency are called wideband, while 
systems with deviation less than the modulating frequency
are called narrow band. Most wireless microphone 
transmitters fall into the lower end of the wideband 
category. (See Figures 2-6 a & b.)  
The "base" or unmodulated frequency of the oscillator 
for a single frequency system is fixed. Historically, the 
frequency of the signal from the VCO (for a conventional, 
crystal-controlled transmitter) was much lower than the 
desired output frequency of the transmitter. In order to
achieve a given transmitter frequency the output from the
VCO was put through a series of frequency multiplier stages.
These multipliers were usually a combination of doublers,
triplers, or even quadruplers. For example, a transmitter
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Figure 2-6a: unmodulated FM signal spectrum
Figure 2-6b: modulated FM signal spectrum
Receiver: 
100 dB 
Dynamic 
Range
Transmitter:1
00 dB 
Dynamic 
Range
Radio Link:  
50 dB 
Dynamic 
Range
(Audio noise floor)
(Audio noise floor)
-40 dB 
(Radio link noise floor)
+10 dB 
(Over-modulation)
(Audio clipping)
(Audio clipping)
+10 dB
+20 dB
-10 dB
0 dB
-20 dB
-30 dB
-50 dB
-60 dB
-40 dB
-70 dB
-80 dB
+10 dB
+20 dB
-10 dB
0 dB
-20 dB
-30 dB
-50 dB
-60 dB
-40 dB
-70 dB
-80 dB
Receiver: 
100 dB 
Dynamic 
Range
Transmitter:
100 dB 
Dynamic 
Range
Radio Link:  
50 dB 
Dynamic 
Range
(Audio noise floor)
(Audio noise floor)
-40 dB 
(Radio link noise floor)
+10 dB 
(Over-modulation)
(Audio clipping)
(Audio clipping)
+10 dB
+20 dB
-10 dB
0 dB
-20 dB
-30 dB
-50 dB
-60 dB
-40 dB
-70 dB
-80 dB
+10 dB
+20 dB
-10 dB
0 dB
-20 dB
-30 dB
-50 dB
-60 dB
-40 dB
-70 dB
-80 dB
Variable 
compression 
rate
Variable 
expansion 
rate
11
Figure 2-5a: compander (2:1, fixed rate)
Figure 2-5b: compander (variable)
Transmitter:
100 dB 
Dynamic 
Range

that employs two triplers (for a 9x multiplication) would use
a VCO with a base frequency of 20 MHz to achieve a 180
MHz transmitted frequency. The multipliers also function
as amplifiers so that the output signal is at the desired
power level as well. (See Figure 2-7.)
A few tuneable transmitters use multiple crystals to obtain
multiple frequencies. Today, however, the base frequency
of the VCO for most tuneable systems is adjustable by a
technique known as frequency synthesis. A control circuit
called a phase-locked-loop (PLL) is used to calibrate the
transmitter frequency to a reference "clock" frequency
through an adjustable frequency divider. By changing the
divider in discrete steps, the transmitter frequency can be
precisely varied or tuned over the desired range. 
Frequency-synthesized designs allow the audio signal to
modulate the VCO directly at the transmitter frequency. 
No multiplier stages are required. (See Figure 2-8.)  
The last internal element of the transmitter is the power
supply. For portable transmitters, power is generally 
supplied by batteries.  Since the voltage level of batteries
falls as they are discharged, it is necessary to design the device to operate over a wide range of voltage and/or to employ 
voltage-regulating circuitry.  Most designs, especially those
requiring a 9 V battery, use the battery voltage directly. 
Others, typically those using 1.5 V cells, have DC-to-DC 
converters that boost the low voltage up to the desired 
operating value. Battery life varies widely among transmitters, from just a few hours up to twenty hours, depending on
output power, battery type, and overall circuit efficiency. 
Receiver: General Description
Receivers are available in both fixed and portable 
designs. (See Figure 2-9.) Portable receivers resemble
portable transmitters externally: they are characterized 
by small size, one or two outputs (microphone/line, headphone), minimal controls and indicators (power, level), and
(usually) a single antenna.  Internally they are functionally
similar to fixed receivers, again with the exception of the
power supply (battery vs. AC).  The important features of 
receivers will be presented in the context of fixed units,
which exhibit a greater range of choices. 
Fixed receivers offer various outward features: units
may be free standing or rack-mountable; outputs may 
include balanced/unbalanced microphone or line level as
well as headphones; indicators for power and audio/radio
signal level may be present; controls for power and output
level are usually offered; antennas may be removable or 
permanently attached. Like transmitters, receivers can vary
greatly in packaging, but inside they must achieve a 
common goal: receive the radio signal efficiently and
convert it into a suitable audio signal output.  Once again
it will be useful to look at the main functional elements of
the typical receiver. (See Figure 2-10.)
12
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Figure 2-7: crystal-controlled transmitter
Figure 2-8: frequency-synthesized transmitter
fixed
portable
Figure 2-9:
receiver examples
Figure 2-10: general receiver block diagram 

Receiver: Radio Circuitry
The first section of receiver circuitry is the "front end."
Its function is to provide a first stage of radio frequency (RF) 
filtering to prevent unwanted radio signals from causing 
interference in subsequent stages. It should effectively reject
signals that are substantially above or below the operating
frequency of the receiver.  For a single frequency receiver the
front end can be fairly narrow.  For a tuneable receiver it
must be wide enough to accommodate the desired range of
frequencies if the front end filter itself is not tuneable.  
In order to accommodate very wide tuning ranges, a
track-tuned front-end filter is sometimes used. This is a 
relatively narrow filter that is automatically centered on the
tuned frequency to prevent excessive off-channel radio 
energy from entering the receiver. (See Figure 2-11.)
The second receiver section is the "local oscillator" 
(usually abbreviated as "LO"). This circuit generates a 
constant radio frequency that is related to the frequency of
the received radio signal but differs by a "defined amount."
Single frequency receivers have a fixed frequency local 
oscillator (LO), again using a quartz crystal. Tuneable 
receivers have an adjustable LO, which generally uses a 
frequency synthesis design. (See Figures 2-12 a & b.) 
Next, the (filtered) received signal and the local 
oscillator output are input to the "mixer" section. The mixer,
in a radio receiver, is a circuit that combines these signals in
a process called "heterodyning." This process produces two
"new" signals:  the first new signal is at a frequency which is
the sum of the received signal frequency and the local 
oscillator frequency, while the second is at a frequency
which is the difference between the received signal 
frequency and the local oscillator frequency. Both the sum
and the difference signals contain the audio information 
carried by the received signal. It should be noted that the
LO frequency can be above or below the received frequency
and still yield the same difference frequency when 
combined in the mixer. When the LO frequency is lower than
the received frequency the design is called "low-side 
injection." When it is above it is called "high-side injection." 
The sum and difference signals are then sent to a series
of filter stages that are all tuned to the frequency of the 
difference signal. This frequency is the "intermediate 
frequency" (IF), so-called because it is lower than the 
received radio frequency but still higher than the final audio
frequency.  It is also the "defined amount" used to determine
the local oscillator frequency of the previous section. The
narrowly tuned IF filters are designed to completely reject
the sum signal, as well as the LO frequency and the original
received signal, and any other radio signals that may have
gotten through the front end. The IF filters allow only the 
difference signal to pass through. (See Figure 2-13.) This
effectively converts the received radio frequency (RF) signal
to the much lower intermediate frequency (IF) signal and
makes subsequent signal processing more efficient. This
overall process is called "downconversion."
If only one LO and one mixer stage are used then only
one intermediate frequency is produced and the receiver 
is said to be a "single conversion" type. In a "double 
conversion" receiver the incoming signal is converted to the
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Figure 2-12a: single conversion, crystal-controlled receiver
Figure 2-12b: single conversion, frequency-synthesized receiver
Figure 2-13: receiver, filter characteristic 
13
60 MHz tuning range
Tuned frequency
filter
Effective front-end 
Effective front-end 
bandwidth ~ 20MHz
bandwidth ~ 20MHz
Figure 2-11: track tuning front-end filter

final IF in two successive stages, each with its own LO and
mixer. This technique can provide increased stability and 
interference rejection, though at significantly higher design
complexity and cost. Double conversion is more common in
UHF receiver designs where the received signal frequency
is extremely high. (See Figures 2-14 a & b.)
The IF signal is finally input to the "detector" stage
which "demodulates" or extracts the audio signal by one of
several methods. One standard technique is known as 
"quadrature." When two signals are out of phase with 
each other by exactly 90 degrees they are said to be in 
quadrature. When such signals are multiplied together and
low-pass filtered the resulting output signal consists only 
of frequency variations of the original input signal. 
This effectively eliminates the (high-frequency) carrier 
frequency leaving only the low-frequency modulation 
information (the original audio signal).  
In a quadrature FM detector the IF signal passes
through a circuit which introduces a 90 degree phase shift
relative to the original IF signal. The phase-shifted IF signal
is then multiplied by the straight IF signal. A low-pass filter
is applied to the product, which results in a signal that is
now the audio signal originally used to modulate the carrier
in the transmitter.
Receiver: Audio Circuitry
The 
demodulated 
audio 
signal 
undergoes
complementary signal processing to complete the 
dynamic range recovery and noise reduction action begun
in the transmitter. For conventional compander systems, a
1:2 expansion is applied, followed by a high-frequency 
de-emphasis. If a multi-band process was used in the
transmitter, the received audio is divided into the 
corresponding bands, each band is expanded, the high
frequency band is de-emphasized, and finally the bands
are recombined to yield the full-range audio signal.  
In the case of a signal-dependent compression system,
complementary variable expansion is used followed by
high frequency de-emphasis. Again, a precision VCA with
a true-rms audio level detector is required.
As mentioned in the Transmitter description, a hybrid 
analog receiver may use digital signal processing of the
audio signal to complement the processing (analog or 
digital) used in the transmitter.
Finally, an output amplifier supplies the necessary
audio signal characteristics (level and impedance) for 
connection to an external device such as a mixer input, a
recorder, headphones, etc. Typically, better receivers will
include a balanced output that can be switched between
line level and microphone level. Unbalanced outputs are
usually provided as well.  
Receiver: Squelch
One additional circuit that is important to proper receiver
behavior is called "squelch" or muting.  The function of this
circuit is to mute or silence the audio output of the receiver
in the absence of the desired radio signal. When the desired
signal is lost (due to multi-path dropout, excessive distance,
loss of power to the transmitter, etc.) the "open" receiver may
pick up another signal or background radio "noise." Typically,
this is heard as "white" noise and is often much louder than
the audio signal from the desired source.  
The traditional squelch circuit is an audio switch 
controlled by the radio signal level using a fixed or 
manually adjustable threshold (level). (See Figure 2-15.)
When the received signal strength falls below this level the
output of the receiver is muted. Ideally, the squelch level
should be set just above the background radio noise level
or at the point where the desired signal is becoming too
noisy to be acceptable. Higher settings of squelch level 
require higher received signal strength to unmute the 
receiver. Since received signal strength decreases as 
transmission distance increases, higher squelch settings
will decrease the operating range of the system.  
One refinement of the standard squelch circuit is 
referred to as "noise squelch." (See Figure 2-16.) This
technique relies on the fact that the audio from undesirable
radio noise has a great deal of high frequency energy 
compared to a typical audio signal. The noise squelch 
circuit compares the high frequency energy of the received
14
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Figure 2-14b: double conversion, frequency-synthesized receiver
Figure 2-14a: double conversion, crystal-controlled receiver

signal to a reference voltage set by the squelch adjustment.
In this system the squelch control essentially determines
the "quality" of signal (signal-to-noise ratio) required to 
unmute the receiver. This allows operation at lower squelch
settings with no likelihood of noise if the desired signal is lost.  
A further refinement is known as "tone-key" or "tonecode" squelch. It enables the receiver to identify the 
desired radio signal by means of a supra- or sub-audible
tone that is generated in the transmitter and sent along with
the normal audio signal. The receiver will unmute only
when it picks up a radio signal of adequate strength and
also detects the presence of the tone-key. This effectively 
prevents the possibility of noise from the receiver when the
desired transmitter signal is lost, even in the presence of a
(non-tone-key) interfering signal at the same frequency. 
Turn-on and turn-off delays are incorporated in the
transmitter tone-key circuits so that the transmitter power
switch operates silently. When the transmitter is switched
on, the radio signal is activated immediately but the tonekey is briefly delayed, keeping the receiver muted until the
signal is stable. This masks any turn-on noise. When the
transmitter is switched off, the tone-key is deactivated 
instantly, muting the receiver, but actual turn-off of the
transmitted signal is delayed slightly. This masks any turnoff noise. As a result, the need for a separate mute switch
is eliminated. Finally, the tone-key signal is often used to
transmit additional information to the receiver. This may 
include battery voltage, transmitter audio gain settings,
transmitter type, and transmitter power level.  
Receiver: Antenna Configuration
Fixed receivers are offered in two basic external 
configurations:  diversity and non-diversity. Non-diversity
receivers are equipped with a single antenna while diversity
receivers generally have two antennas. Both systems may
offer otherwise similar outward features:  units may be 
free standing or rack-mountable; outputs may include 
balanced/unbalanced microphone or line level as well as
headphones; indicators for power and audio/radio signal
level may be present; controls for power and audio output
level are provided; antenna(s) may be removable or 
permanently attached. (See Figure 2-17.) 
Though diversity receivers tend to include more 
features than non-diversity types, the choice of diversity vs. 
non-diversity receiver is usually dictated by performance
and reliability considerations. Diversity receivers can 
significantly improve both qualities by minimizing the effect
of variations in radio signal strength in a given reception
area due to fading or due to multi-path. Fading is a loss 
of signal strength at excessive distance or because of 
shadowing or blocking of the radio wave. Multi-path is a
more complex phenomenon but both mechanisms can
adversely affect radio reception.  
Multipath
A necessary element in the concept of diversity radio 
reception is the occurrence of "multi-path" effects in radio 
transmission. In the simplest case, radio waves proceed 
directly from the transmitting antenna to the receiving 
antenna in a straight line. The received signal strength is only
a function of the transmitter power and the distance between
the transmitting and receiving antennas. In practice, this situation could only occur outdoors on level, unobstructed terrain.  
In most situations, however, there are objects that 
attenuate radio waves and objects that reflect them. Since
both the transmitting and receiving antennas are essentially
omnidirectional, the receiving antenna picks up a varying
combination of direct and reflected radio waves. The 
reflected waves and direct waves travel different distances
(paths) to arrive at the receiving antenna, hence the term
multi-path. (See Figure 2-18.)
15
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Figure 2-16: noise squelch
non-diversity (single antenna)
diversity (two antennas)
RF
Level
Radio Frquency
un-muted
muted
squelch
threshold
RF signal
and noise
AF
Noise
Level
Audio Frequency
RF Noise
Audio
Characteristic
Noise Squelch
Threshold
Audio
Characteristic
muted
unmuted
Figure 2-15: threshold squelch
Figure 2-17: examples of receivers

These multiple paths result in differing levels, arrival
times and phase relationships between the radio waves. The
net received signal strength at any location is the sum of the
direct and reflected waves. These waves can reinforce or
interfere with each other depending on their relative amplitude and phase. The result is substantial variation in average
signal strength throughout an area. This creates the possibility of degradation or loss of the radio signal at certain
points in space, even when the transmitter is at a relatively
short distance from the receiver. Cancellation of the signal
can occur when the direct and indirect waves are similar in
amplitude and opposite in phase. (See Figure 2-19.) 
The audible effects of such signal strength variation
range from a slight swishing sound ("noise-up"), to severe
noises ("hits"), to complete loss of audio ("dropout"). Similar
effects are sometimes noted in automobile radio reception
in areas with many tall buildings. The "size" of a dropout 
region is related to wavelength: in the VHF range (long 
wavelength) dropout areas are larger but farther apart, while
in the UHF range (short wavelength) they are smaller but
closer together.  For this reason, multi-path effects tend to be
more severe in the UHF range. These effects are 
unpredictable, uncomfortable, and ultimately unavoidable
with single-antenna (non-diversity) receivers.  
Receiver: Diversity Techniques
Diversity refers to the general principle of using multiple
(usually two) antennas to take advantage of the very low
probability of simultaneous dropouts at two different 
antenna locations. "Different" means that the signals 
are statistically independent at each location. This is also
sometimes called "space diversity," referring to the space
between the antennas.  
For radio waves, this "de-correlation" is a function of 
wavelength:  a separation of one wavelength results in
nearly complete de-correlation. In most cases, at least 
one-quarter wavelength separation between antennas is
necessary for significant diversity effect:  about 40 cm for
VHF systems and about 10 cm for UHF systems. Some 
increased benefit may be had by greater separation, up to
one wavelength. Spacing beyond one wavelength does not
significantly improve diversity performance, but large or
unusually shaped areas may be covered with greater 
antenna separation.
There are a number of diversity techniques that have
had some degree of success. The term "true" diversity has
come to imply those systems which have two receiver 
sections, but technically, any system which samples the
radio field at two (or more) different locations, and can 
"intelligently" select or combine the resulting signals is a
true diversity system.
The simplest technique, called "passive antenna 
combining" utilizes a single receiver with a passive 
combination of two or three antennas. Antennas combined
in this manner create an "array," which is essentially a single
antenna with fixed directional characteristic. In its most 
effective form (three antennas, each at right angles to the
other two) it can avoid complete dropouts, but with a 
reduction of maximum range. This is because the array 
output will almost always be less than the output of a single
antenna at the optimum location. If only two antennas are
used, dropouts can still occur in the event of an out-of-phase
condition between them. Cost is relatively low but setup of
multiple antennas can be somewhat cumbersome. This is
not a "true" diversity design. (See Figure 2-20.)
A true diversity variation of this technique is "antenna
phase diversity." It also employs two antennas and a 
single receiver but provides an active combining circuit for
the two antennas. This circuit can switch the phase of one
antenna relative to the other, eliminating the possibility of
phase cancellation between them. However, switching
noise is possible as well as other audible effects if 
switching is incorrect. Range is sometimes greater with 
favorable antenna combinations. Cost is relatively low.
Setup requires somewhat greater antenna spacing for best
results. (See Figure 2-21.) 
16
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Figure 2-18: multipath
Figure 2-19: signal level at two antennas with multipath

The next variation, "antenna switching diversity," again 
consists of a single receiver with two antennas. The receiver 
includes circuitry that selects the antenna with the better signal
according to an evaluation of the radio signal.  Switching noise
is possible but this system avoids the possibility of phase cancellation between antennas because the antennas are never
combined. Range is the same as for a single antenna system.
Cost is relatively low and setup is convenient. (See Figure 2-22.) 
In both of these active antenna diversity approaches,
the switching decision is based on the received signal 
quality of a single receiver section. When the signal quality 
falls below some preset threshold, switching occurs 
immediately. If the new antenna (or antenna combination)
doesn’t improve the reception, the receiver must switch back
to the original state. The lack of "predictive" ability often
causes unnecessary switching, increasing the chance of
noise. The switching speed is also critical:  too fast and 
audible noise occurs, too slow and a dropout may occur. 
A recent antenna switching method offers predictive 
diversity capability using a microcontroller to optimize 
switching characteristics. A running average signal level and
a maximum signal level are calculated by analyzing the
change in signal level over time. Comparing the current 
average signal level to the most recent maximum signal level
determines the switch action, based on typical dropout 
characteristics. Small declines at high signal levels indicate
impending dropout, causing a switch to occur. At moderate
signal levels, larger decreases are allowed before switching.
At very low signal levels switching is curtailed to avoid 
unnecessary noise.  Of course, if the signal level is increasing, no switching occurs. The onset of dropout can be more
accurately recognized and countered, while eliminating
switching when there is little likelihood for improvement. 
"Receiver switching diversity" is a widely used diversity 
system.  It consists of two complete receiver sections, each
with its own associated antenna, and circuitry that selects
the audio from the receiver that has the better signal.
Switching noise is possible but when properly designed
these systems can have very good dropout protection with
little chance of other audible effects due to incorrect 
selection. This is because the system compares the signal
condition at each receiver output before audio switching
occurs. Range is the same as with single antenna systems.
Cost is higher, but setup is convenient. (See Figure 2-23.)
"Ratio combining diversity" also uses two complete 
receiver sections with associated antennas. This design
takes advantage of the fact that, most of the time, the signal
at both antennas is useable. The diversity circuitry combines
the outputs of the two receiver sections by proportionally
mixing them rather than switching between them. At any
given moment, the combination is proportional to the signal
17
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Figure 2-22: antenna switching
Figure 2-21: antenna phase switching
Figure 2-20: passive antenna combining
Figure 2-23: receiver switching
Figure 2-24: receiver combining

quality of each receiver. The output will usually consist of
a mix of the two audio sections. In the case of loss of 
reception at one antenna, the output is chosen from the
other section. Excellent dropout protection is obtained with
no possibility of switching noise since the diversity circuit
is essentially an intelligent panpot, not a switch. (See Figure
2-24.) Signal-to-noise is improved by up to 3 dB. Range
can be greater than with single antenna systems. Cost is 
somewhat higher, setup is convenient. 
A properly implemented diversity system can yield 
measurable improvements in reliability, range, and signalto-noise ratio. Although a comparable non-diversity 
system will perform adequately most of the time in typical
setups, the extra insurance of a diversity system is 
worthwhile. This is particularly true if the RF environment
is severe (multipath), troubleshooting time is minimal (no
rehearsal), or dropout-free performance is required 
(ideally always). The price difference is small enough that
diversity receivers are typically chosen in all but the most
budget-conscious applications. 
An additional method for improving signal reliability 
in the presence of interference is called "Frequency 
Diversity". This technique relies on the low likelihood 
of simultaneous interference on two different radio 
frequencies. To set up a frequency diversity system 
requires two transmitters, each set to a different frequency,
and two matching receiver channels. The two received 
signals are connected to an audio mixer on two separate
channels. If the signal from either transmitter is interrupted,
the audio engineer can continue with the remaining signal. 
Presently, this is practical only by using two bodypack
transmitters on a single individual, typically with lavaliere 
or headworn microphones. They may be connected to 
a single microphone or possibly two closely-spaced 
microphones. Frequency diversity is generally reserved for
the primary user in critical situations where the cost of
"double-packing" is justified.
However, handheld transmitters are now available that
can transmit simultaneously
on two different frequencies. 
In addition, the matching 
receivers can automatically 
transition between the two 
signals when interference 
occurs so that only a single
mixer channel is required and
no manual intervention is 
necessary to maintain signal
continuity.
Antennas
In addition to the circuitry contained inside transmitters
and receivers, one critical circuitry element is often located
outside the unit: the antenna. An antenna is electrically 
“resonant” (tuned) at a particular frequency or range 
of frequencies. Since frequency is inversely related to 
wavelength (via the Wave Equation), the size of the antenna
is directly related to the corresponding radio wavelength(s).
Lower radio frequencies require larger antennas, while
higher frequencies use smaller antennas. Another 
characteristic of antennas is their relative efficiency at 
converting electrical power into radiated power and vice
versa. An increase of 6 dB in radiated power, or an increase
of 6 dB in received signal strength can correspond to a 50%
increase in range. Likewise, a loss of 6 dB in signal may 
result in 50% decrease in range. Finally, antennas are said
to be “reciprocal”. That is, they can generally operate in a
transmitting mode or in a receiving mode with exactly 
the same characteristics. The exception is an “active” 
(amplified) antenna which can be used only in a receiving
mode due to its built-in receive-only amplifier.  
The function of an antenna is to act as the interface 
between the internal circuitry of the transmitter (or receiver)
and the external radio signal. In the case of the transmitter,
it must radiate the desired signal as efficiently as possible,
that is, at the desired strength and in the desired direction.
Since the output power of most transmitters is limited by
regulatory agencies to some maximum level, and since battery life is a function of power output, antenna efficiency is
critical. At the same time, size and portability of transmitters
is usually very important. This results in only a few suitable
designs for transmitter antennas. (See Figure 2-25.) 
The smallest simple antenna that is consistent with 
reasonable transmitter output is an antenna that is physically
(and electrically) one quarter as long as the wavelength of
the radio wave frequency being transmitted. This is called a
18
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Figure 2-25: transmitter antenna examples
internal
rubber-duckie
trailing wire

"1/4 wave" antenna. It takes different forms depending on
the type of transmitter being used. For some bodypack
transmitters, the antenna is a trailing wire cut to an 
appropriate length. In other designs the cable that attaches
the microphone to the transmitter may be used as the 
antenna. In either case, the antenna must be allowed to 
extend to its proper length for maximum efficiency. The 
effective bandwidth of this antenna type is great enough that
only about three different lengths are required to cover the
high-band VHF range. For transmitter applications requiring
even smaller antenna size a short "rubber duckie" antenna
is sometimes used. This type is still (electrically) a 1/4 wave
antenna, but it is wound in a helical coil to yield a shorter
package. There is some loss in efficiency due to the smaller
"aperture" or physical length. In addition, these antennas
have a narrower bandwidth. This may require up to six different
lengths to cover the entire high-band VHF range for example.  
Handheld transmitters generally conceal the antenna 
inside the body of the unit, or use the outer metal parts of the
case as the antenna. In either design, the antenna is rarely
a true 1/4 wave long. This results in somewhat less radiated
power for a handheld transmitter with an internal antenna
than a comparable bodypack design with an external 
antenna. However, antenna output is somewhat reduced
when placed close to the body of the user. Since the 
antenna of a hand-held transmitter is usually at some 
distance from the body, though, the practical difference may
be small. Plug-on type transmitters normally use the microphone body and the transmitter case itself as the antenna,
though some manufacturers models have used an external
antenna. In practice the typical VHF transmitter antenna is
less than 10% efficient. UHF types may be significantly 
better because the shorter wavelength of these frequencies
is more consistent with the requirement for a small antenna. 
In all of these designs, the radio wave pattern emitted by
the antenna is omnidirectional in the plane perpendicular to
the axis of the antenna. For a vertically oriented antenna the
radiation pattern is omnidirectional in the horizontal plane,
which is the typical case for a trailing wire antenna. There is
very little output along the axis of the antenna. A threedimensional representation of the field strength from a 
vertical antenna would resemble a horizontal doughnut
shape with the antenna passing through the center of the hole.
(See Figure 2-26.)
Recall that a radio wave has both an electric field 
component and a magnetic field component. A vertically
oriented transmitter antenna radiates an electric field 
component that is also vertical (while the magnetic field
component is horizontal). This is said to be a "vertically 
polarized" wave. Horizontal orientation of the antenna 
produces a "horizontally polarized" wave.  
In receiver applications, the antenna must pick up the 
desired radio signal as efficiently as possible. Since the strength
of the received signal is always far less than that of the 
transmitted signal this requires that the antenna be very 
sensitive to the desired signal and in the desired direction.
However, since the size and location of the receiver are 
less restrictive, and since directional pickup may be useful, a
much greater selection of antenna types is generally available
for receivers. 
Again, the minimum size for adequate reception is 1/4
wavelength. A whip or telescoping antenna of this size is
supplied with most receivers, and it too is omnidirectional
in the horizontal plane when it is vertically oriented. An 
important consideration in the performance of a 1/4 wave
receiving antenna is that its efficiency depends to some
extent on the presence of a "ground plane," that is, a metal
surface at least 1/4 wave long in one or both dimensions
and electrically connected to the receiver ground at the
base of the antenna. Typically, the receiver chassis or 
receiver PC board to which the antenna is attached acts as
a sufficient ground plane. (See Figure 2-27.)  
If more sensitivity is desired, or if it is necessary to mount
an omnidirectional antenna remotely from the receiver, 1/2
wave or 5/8 wave antennas are often used. These antennas
have a theoretical "gain" (increase of sensitivity) up to 3 dB
greater than the 1/4 wave antenna in some configurations. This
can translate into increased range for the system. However,
the 5/8 wave antenna, like the 1/4 wave type, only achieves its
performance with an appropriate ground plane. Without a
ground plane unpredictable effects may occur resulting in
asymmetric pickup patterns and potential signal loss due to
the non-ideal cable/antenna interface. A properly designed 1/2
wave antenna does not require a ground plane, allowing it to
19
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Figure 2-27: 1/4 wave and 1/2 wave antennas UHF range
Horizontal Pattern
(viewed from above)
Vertical Pattern
(viewed from side)
Horizontal Pattern
(viewed from above)
Vertical Pattern
(viewed from side)
Figure 2-26: wideband omnidirectional antenna

be remotely mounted with relative ease. It can also maintain
proper impedance at the cable/antenna interface or can be
directly attached to a receiver or antenna distribution system.
In addition, it is resistant to the effects of electrical noise that
might otherwise be picked up at the interface. 
When antenna size is an issue, such as for portable 
receivers, the previously mentioned 1/4 wave rubber duckie is
an option. UHF designs can use 1/4 wave rubber duckies 
because of the shorter wavelengths. Another relatively small
size remote antenna can be found in the form of a 1/4 wave 
antenna with an attached array of radial elements that 
function as an integral ground plane. Both of these types are
omnidirectional in the horizontal plane when mounted 
vertically. For maximum efficiency, receiving antennas should
be oriented in the same direction as the transmitting antenna.
In the same way that a transmitter antenna produces a radio
wave that is "polarized" in the direction of its orientation, a 
receiver antenna is most sensitive to radio waves that are 
polarized in its direction of orientation. For example, the 
receiving antenna should be vertical if the transmitting antenna
is vertical. If the orientation of the transmitting antenna is 
unpredictable (ie.  handheld use), or if the polarization of the
received wave is unknown (due to multipath reflections) a 
diversity receiver can have even greater benefit. In this case it
is often effective to orient the two receiving antennas at 
different angles, up to perhaps 45 degrees from vertical.
Unidirectional antennas are also available for wireless
microphone systems. These designs are comprised of a 
horizontal boom with multiple transverse elements and are
of the same general type as long range antennas for 
television reception. They can achieve high gain (up to 10
dB compared to the 1/2 wave type) in one direction and can
also reject interfering sources coming from other directions
by as much as 30 dB. (See Figure 2-28.) 
Two common types are the Yagi and the log-periodic.
The Yagi consists of a dipole element and one or more
additional elements:  those located at the rear of the boom
are larger than the dipole element and reflect the signal
back to the dipole while those located at the front are
smaller than the dipole and act to direct the signal on to the
dipole. The Yagi has excellent directivity but has a fairly 
narrow bandwidth and is usually tuned to cover just one
TV channel (6 MHz). The log-periodic achieves greater
bandwidth than the Yagi by using multiple dipole elements
in its array. The size and spacing between the dipoles varies
in a logarithmic progression so that at any given frequency
one or more dipoles are active while the others are 
functioning as reflecting or directing elements, depending
on their size and location relative to the active element(s).
The longer the boom and the greater the number of 
elements the greater is the bandwidth and the directivity. A
typical log-periodic antenna has 6-8 dB of forward gain and
a coverage angle of about 120 degrees. (See Figure 2-29.) 
The helical antenna is a special type of directional antenna.
It is a broadband antenna with up to 12 dB of forward gain
but with a coverage angle of only about 60 degrees. However,
the helical antenna does not have a preferred polarization
angle. That is, when used as a receive antenna it is equally
sensitive to incoming signals polarized at any angle. Likewise,
when used as a transmit antenna, the radiated signal can be
picked up equally well by receive antennas oriented at any
angle. This makes the helical antenna particularly useful
when a high-gain transmit antenna is needed for use with
non-diversity receivers such as in-ear monitor packs.  
Although these directional antennas are somewhat
large (3-5 ft. wide for VHF) and may be mechanically 
cumbersome to mount, they can provide increased range
and greater rejection of interfering sources for certain 
applications. It should also be noted here that these 
antennas should be oriented with the transverse elements
in the vertical direction rather than the horizontal direction
(as would be used for television reception), again because
the transmitting antennas are usually also vertical.  
Antenna Cable
An important but often overlooked component of many
wireless microphone systems is the antenna cable. 
Applications in which the receiver is located away from the
transmitter vicinity and/or within metal racks will require the
use of remote antennas and connecting cables. Compared
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
20
1/2 wave (with amplifier)
log periodic
helical
Figure 2-28: examples of remote receiver antennas
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
30
210
60
240
90
270
120
300
150
330
180
0
Figure 2-29: log periodic antenna polar pattern 
(viewed from above, pointing to right)

to audio frequency signals, the nature of radio frequency 
signal propagation in cables is such that significant losses
can occur in relatively short lengths of cable. The loss is a
function of the cable type and the frequency of the signal.
Figures 2-30 and 2-31 give some approximate losses for
various commonly used antenna cables at different radio
frequencies. It may be noted from this chart that these 
cables have a "characteristic" impedance, typically 50 ohms.
Ideally, for minimum signal loss in antenna systems, all 
components should have the same impedance: that is the
antennas, cables, connectors and the inputs of the receivers.
In practice, the actual losses due to impedance mismatches
in wireless receiver antenna systems are negligible 
compared to the losses due to antenna cable length. For this
reason, it may be acceptable to substitute certain 75 ohm
cable types when the specified loss-per-unit-length at a given
frequency is comparable to the corresponding 50 ohm type.
For example, a quality RG-6 (75 ohm) cable may be 
substituted for a similar RG-8/RG-213 (50 ohm). Note that 75
ohm connectors are required for 75 ohm cable, but 75 ohm
BNC connectors will mate with 50 ohm BNC connectors.
Obviously, the benefits of even a high gain antenna can be
quickly lost using the wrong cable or too long a cable. 
In general, antenna cable lengths should be kept as short as
possible. Antenna amplifiers can be used to compensate for
losses in long cable runs. (See Figure 2-35.)
In addition, the construction of the cable should be 
considered: coaxial cables with a solid center conductor 
and stiff insulator/shield are most suitable for permanent 
installation, while cables with stranded conductors and
flexible insulator/ shield should be used for portable 
applications which require repeated setups. Finally, the
number of connections in the antenna signal path should
be kept to a minimum.  
Antenna Distribution
The last component found in larger wireless receiver 
systems is some form of antenna signal distribution. It is
often desirable to reduce the total number of antennas in
multiple systems by distributing the signal from one set of
antennas to several receivers. This is usually done to 
simplify system setup, but can also improve performance
by reducing certain types of interference as will be seen
later. There are two general types of antenna distribution
available: passive and active. Passive antenna splitting is 
accomplished with simple in-line devices that provide
RF impedance matching for minimum loss. Still, a single
passive split results in about a 3 dB loss, which may 
translate into some loss of range. (See Figure 2-33.) Multiple passive splits are impractical due to excessive signal loss.
To allow coupling of antenna signals to more receivers 
and to overcome the loss of passive splitters, active antenna
distribution amplifiers are used. These are also known as
"active antenna splitters" or "antenna multi-couplers." These
devices provide enough amplification to make up for splitter
loss, and usually operate at “unity” gain overall, that is, no 
net amplification occurs. Though a multi-coupler is generally
a separate accessory, some receiver designs are equipped
with internal antenna distribution when multiple receiver
sections are incorporated in the same chassis such as 
modular or card-cage systems.
Stand-alone active antenna splitters can typically feed
up to four receivers from one set of antennas. (See Figure 
2-34a.) If more receivers are required, the outputs of one
distribution amplifier can feed the inputs of a second level set
of distribution amplifiers. (See Figure 2-34b.)  Each of these
can then feed several receivers. Two or possibly three levels
of active splitters is the maximum recommended, due to the
potential for increased RF distortion and interference. 
Certain receiver designs incorporate active antenna 
"cascade" outputs. Since these outputs are unity gain, it is 
possible to cascade the antenna signals from one receiver
to the next, up to as many as ten units. A limitation of the
typical "daisy chain" scheme is that all receivers must be
in the same frequency band. Another consideration is that
in the event of power loss or antenna connection loss to a
particular receiver, all subsequent receivers in the cascade
will lose antenna signal. Nevertheless, active cascade ports
can simplify hookup and reduce the requirement for 
stand-alone active splitters.
21
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Figure 2-31: coaxial antenna cable loss at VHF and UHF frequencies
Figure 2-30: comparison of coaxial cable types 

WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Figure 2-34b: active antenna distribution (two level) 
Figure 2-34a: active antenna distribution (one level) 
Figure 2-33: passive antenna distribution 
Figure 2-35: antenna amplifiers 
22
Large Room/Multi-Room Applications
Sometimes it is desired to use a single wireless 
transmitter throughout a very large space or in 
multiple rooms. It is difficult to get reliable reception
from transmitters in distant rooms or in extremely
large rooms, especially if there are many obstructions or strong RF interference. A centrally located
receiver antenna may improve the situation. Line-ofsight transmitter to receiver placement is always the 
preferred setup.
If a diversity receiver with detachable antennas is
used the two antennas may be located in different
rooms, though this essentially reduces the receiver
mode to two non-diversity sections. If diversity 
reception is to be maintained two antennas may be
located in each room with the use of an antenna
combiner. The "A" antenna in one room is combined
with the "A" antenna in the other room using an 
antenna combiner. The "B" antennas are similarly
connected and the "A" and "B" combiner outputs are
fed to the receiver "A" and "B" antenna inputs. 
(See Figure 2-32.)
It is also possible to use multiple receivers and 
antennas tuned to the frequency of a single 
transmitter. The audio outputs of the receivers can
then be combined in a mixer to allow continuous
pickup of the signal from multiple locations. 
However, some type of audio level control must be
employed since the audio level of such a system will
increase by 3dB each time the number of active 
receivers doubles. That is, if the transmitter is picked
up by two receivers at the same time the overall
audio level will be 3dB louder than when picked up
by only one receiver. Automatic mixers can control
this effect.
Figure 2-32: multi-room antenna distribution

WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
CHAPTER THREE
WIRELESS SYSTEM OPERATION
Frequency Bands For Wireless Systems
Existing wireless microphone systems transmit and 
receive on a specific radio frequency, called the operating
frequency. Individual radio frequencies are found in 
frequency "bands" which are specific ranges of frequencies. 
Use of radio frequencies in the United States 
is regulated by the FCC (Federal Communication 
Commission). The FCC has designated certain bands
of frequencies and certain frequencies in those bands
for use by wireless microphones, as well as by other
services. In the US, the frequencies used for wireless
audio systems may be grouped into four general bands
or ranges: low-band VHF (49-108 MHz), high-band
VHF (169-216 MHz), low-band UHF (450-698 MHz)
and high-band UHF (900-952 MHz). VHF stands for
"Very High Frequency," UHF stands for "Ultra High 
Frequency." (See Figure 3-1.)
The FCC further determines who can operate in each
band and who has priority if more than one user is 
operating. "Primary" users include licensed broadcasters
(radio and television) and commercial communications
services (2-way radio, pagers, and cellular telephones).
Wireless microphone operators are always considered to
be "secondary" users. In general, priority is given to primary
users: secondary users may not interfere with primary
users, and secondary users may be subject to interference
from primary users.  
On the subject of 
licensing, it should be noted
that while manufacturers 
must be licensed by the FCC
to sell wireless equipment, 
it is the responsibility of the
operator to observe FCC 
regulations regarding their 
actual use.  
We will briefly describe
each band and its advantages
and disadvantages for wireless
microphone system operation,
based on the designated
users of the band, the 
physical characteristics of 
the band, and the regulatory 
limitations of the band.  
The VHF Band
At the beginning of the low-band VHF range is the 49
MHz region, used not only by wireless microphones but also
by cordless telephones, walkie-talkies, and radio controlled
toys. 54-72 MHz is occupied by VHF television channels 
2-4. The 72 MHz area is used by “assistive listening” 
type wireless microphone systems (ALS). 76-88 MHz is 
assigned to VHF television channels 5 and 6. At the top, 
88-108 MHz is the commercial FM radio broadcast band.
(See Figure 3-2.) All of these regions have been used at one
time or another for wireless microphone systems. Allowable 
deviation limits (typically up to 15KHz) can accommodate
high-fidelity audio (the same as for FM broadcast). The 
propagation of these waves through the air is very good, as is
their ability to pass through many non-metallic substances 
(a result of their relatively long wavelength). The most attractive feature of operation in this band was low equipment cost.
Except for assistive listening systems, however, lowband VHF is not recommended for serious applications.
Due to the large number of primary and secondary users,
and high levels of general radio frequency (RF) "noise,"
this band is prone to interference from many sources.
Transmitter power is limited to less than 50 mW (except in
the 72-76 MHz range where up to 1 watt is allowed for 
assistive listening systems). Finally, the minimum proper 
antenna size for units in this range can be over one meter
long (one quarter of a five meter wave), which can severely
limit portability and/or efficiency.  
Next is the high-band VHF range, historically used for
professional applications, in which quality systems were
available at a variety of prices. In the US, the high-band

Frequency in MHz
TV 7-13 (174-216 MHz )
TV 7-13 (174-216 MHz )
TV 14TV 14-51
51
(470-698 MHz)
(470-698 MHz)
³7UDYHOLQJ´IUHTXHQFLHV
0+]
+LJKEDQG9+)
8+)
$/60+]
Wireless System Bands (licensed) 
Wireless System Bands (unlicensed) 
0+]
*+]UDQJH
2400
67/,&5IUHTXHQFLHV
0+]
0+]
UDQJH
Figure 3-1: wireless frequency bands in the United States
23

24
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
VHF range is divided into two bands, which are available to 
wireless microphone users. The first of these, from 169-172
MHz, includes eight specific frequencies designated by the
FCC (Part 90.263b or just "Part 90") for wireless microphone
use by general business. These frequencies are often 
referred to as "travelling frequencies," because they can 
(theoretically) be used throughout the US without concern
for interference from broadcast television. Legal limits of 
deviation (+/_12 KHz) allow high quality audio transmission.
Once again, power is limited to 50 mw. Propagation 
characteristics are good, and antenna length is more 
manageable at about one-half meter for a quarter-wave type. 
Unfortunately, the primary users in this band include
many business band and government operations such as
digital paging services, forestry, hydro-electric power 
stations, and the Coast Guard. Since the secondary user 
category is not restrictive, the potential for interference from
both primary and other secondary users is always present.
Also, general RF noise is still fairly strong in this band. In
addition, due to the limitation of available frequency 
bandwidth, and the spacing of the prescribed eight 
frequencies, it is only feasible to operate, at most, two or
three units simultaneously on travelling frequencies. Finally,
these frequencies are not generally legal outside of the US
and Canada.  
The larger part of the high-band VHF region is 174-216
MHz. This band is designated by the FCC for licensed use
by broadcasters and film/video producers, as well as 
unlicensed use by many secondary users. The primary
users of this band are VHF television channels 7-13.  
Once again, high quality audio is possible within legal 
deviation limits (+15 kHz). The 50 mw power restriction
is the same as for low-band, propagation losses are still 
minimal, and acceptable quarter-wave antenna sizes 
range down to less than one-half meter.  
The possibility of interference from other secondary
users and general RF noise exists, but it is much less likely
than for low-band frequencies. In addition, although this
range includes powerful primary users (television channels
7-13), there are ample frequencies available (locally 
unused television channels) in almost any part of the US.
Licensing: The FCC has established new licensing
rules for wireless audio system users in the VHF and
UHF television bands.  It is no longer necessary for
these systems to be licensed by the user if the transmit power is limited to 50mW or less.  Systems used in
this way are now classified as "unlicensed secondary
users".  As such, they must still avoid interfering with
the primary users in the band (broadcast television) as
well as with licensed secondary users.  The devices
themselves must still be type-approved by the FCC.
Presently, the class of secondary wireless users that
may qualify for an FCC license is limited mainly to
broadcasters and motion picture/video production
businesses.  
Figure 3-2: VHF allocations in the United States (30-300 MHz)

25
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
The UHF Band
The low-band UHF range of frequencies may be 
considered as two overlapping bands: low (450-512 MHz)
and high (470-806 MHz). The primary users of these bands
are business services such as land mobile radio and pagers
(450-512 MHz), public safety (470-512 MHz), and UHF 
television channels 14-51 (470-698 MHz). As in the highband VHF region, unused television channels are available
for wireless microphones and other wireless audio devices.
Most cities have a significant number of television stations
and the largest cities may also have public safety operations.
Though RF noise is lower in the UHF band, and there are
usually sufficient unused television channels presently, this
spectrum is becoming increasingly crowded.
Like high-band VHF, users may be licensed or 
unlicensed in the UHF band. The required minimum 
quarter-wave antenna size for UHF radio waves is 9-16
cm (only one-quarter to one-third that for VHF). Equipment
is available at a wide range of prices and nearly all 
are frequency-agile, diversity systems. Very high quality 
audio can now be achieved as well as a large number of 
simultaneous systems. 
The high-band UHF range (900 MHz-1GHz) includes
studio-to-transmitter links (STL 944-952 MHz), other 
primary users, and a host of secondary users. (See Figure
3-3.) This band offers additional channels and potentially
less interference from RF noise, as well as antenna lengths
of less than 9 cm. Other operating characteristics are similar
to low-band UHF. However, secondary users are allowed to
operate without licensing in much of this range. One such
range is 902-928 MHz, a multi-user band that became
popular for consumer products such as cordless 
telephones. Many of these products have moved to the
"DECT" band (1920-1930 MHz) reducing congestion in
900 MHz band. There are now several high quality 
wireless microphone systems that operate in this range,
most of them fully digital. While not completely immune to 
interference from other users within that band, they do
offer performance comparable to analog systems in 
the standard UHF band. The primary limitation for most of
this 900 MHz equipment is that a maximum of about five
systems may be operated simultaneously in this range due
to occupied bandwidth requirements. 
Recently, the 2.4 GHz band has attracted some 
interest for wireless microphone use. Potential advantages
of this band are: very short antennas (less than 4 cm.), no
high power primary users, international availability 
(almost), no bandwidth/modulation scheme limits, and no
license requirement. Unfortunately, these same features
have already attracted a considerable number of users:
cordless telephones and short-to-medium range wireless
network applications such as "Bluetooth" and "Wi-Fi." Add
to this the existing base of 2.4 GHz users that includes the
ISM (Industrial, Scientific, and Medical) band as well as the
lowly microwave oven and it would appear that this band
may be subject to the same fate as its other unlicensed
predecessors. However, many of the devices in this band
use a "spread-spectrum" modulation scheme, which 
Figure 3-3: UHF allocations in the United States (300 MHz - 3GHz)
608
806
902
941
512
420
403
322
400
470
300
450
614
928
MOBILE
SATELLITE
300 MHz
960 MHz
CELLULAR 
TELEPHONE
TV 38-51
TV 38-51
TV 21-36
TV 21-36
TV 14TV 1420
20
LAND 
LAND 
MOBILE
MOBILE
LAND MOBILE
LAND MOBILE
MOBILE
SATELLITE
FIXED
FIXED
FIXED
FIXED
FIXED
MOBILE
MOBILE
MOBILE
MOBILE
MOBILE
Amateur
RADIOLOCATION
RADIO ASTRONOMY
Amateur
Amateur
RADIORADIOLOCATION
LOCATION
AVIATION RADIONAVIGATION
MOBILE SATELLITE
R-NAV SATELLITE
STD. FREQUENCY.& TIME SATELLITE
RADIO 
ASTRONOMY
MOBILE SATELLITE
METEOROLOGY
METEOROLOGY, 
SATELLITE, SPACE
Space
Meteorology
FIXED
LAND MOBILE
LAND MOBILE
FIXED
FIXED
FIXED
MOBILE
AVIATION RADIONAVIGATION
3 GHz
960 MHz
Amateur
AVIATION RADIONAVIGATION
RADIOLOCATION
RADIOLOCATION
RADIOLOCATION
RADIOLOCATION 
SATELLITE
RADIOLOCATION
MOBILE
FIXED
ASTRONOMY, SATELLITE, SPACE
MOBILE
FIXED
FIXED
FIXED
MOBILE
FIXED
SPACE
MOBILE 
(AERONAUTICAL TELEMETRY)
MOBILE SATELLITE 
(AERO & MARINE)
RADIONAVIGATION, 
MOBILE SATELLITE, 
RADIOASTRONOMY
MOBILE SATELLITE 
(AERO & MARINE)
RADIOASTRONOMY, 
METEOROLOGY
METEOROLOGY
PCS
FIXED
FIXED
FIXED
FIXED
FIXED
FIXED
FIXED
FIXED
FIXED
MOBILE
MOBILE
MOBILE
MOBILE
AMATEUR, WI-FI, 
AMATEUR, WI-FI, 
BLUETOOTH
BLUETOOTH
RADIONAVIGATION, 
METEOROLOGY, 
RADIOLOCATION
RADIONAVIGATION, 
RADIOLOCATION
MOBILE
RADIOLOCATION
Amateur
BROADCAST SATELLITE, 
RADIOASTRONOMY, SPACE
RADIOLOCATION
SATELLITE
BROADCAST 
SATELLITE
AMATEUR
BROADCAST 
SATELLITE
RADIOLOCATION
FIXED
MOBILE
MOBILE
FIXED
SPACE
SPACE
FIXED
MOBILE
METEOROLOGY
LAND 
MOBILE
LAND 
MOBILE
1700
2390
960
1215
1435 1530
1660
1559
2500
2700
300
1850
1990
(government frequencies)
(wireless microphone frequencies)
698
Telecom
& 
Public 
Safety

26
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
reduces mutual interference to some extent. Using similar
schemes, several manufacturers have developed digital
wireless audio systems that can successfully operate in the
presence of other existing 2.4GHz equipment.
Finally, it should be kept in mind that the allocation of
these bands is always subject to change as demand for
spectrum increases. In the US, for example, proposals to
designate unused VHF TV channels in major urban areas for
use by land-mobile services are being considered. The 700
MHz band (actually 698-806 MHz) is now occupied by
telecommunications services and public safety. As 
always, manufacturers and users must continue to evaluate
these developments for their impact on wireless system 
operation.
Why UHF?
Though the VHF range offered the benefit of good
propagation due to longer wavelengths, several features 
of the UHF range eventually dominated the interest of 
most manufacturers and users. A combination of larger 
frequency range (222 MHz UHF vs. 42 MHz VHF), smaller
antennas (UHF less than half the size of VHF), and 
dramatic radio circuitry advances have all but eliminated
VHF systems from the current landscape. Present UHF
systems offer much greater performance capabilities 
than historical VHF systems and at comparable or even 
lower cost.
Although the UHF television band has been reduced by
regulatory agencies, it remains the largest contiguous block
of radio spectrum in most countries, particularly in the US.
In response, UHF wireless systems have become considerably more efficient in bandwidth use and continue to offer
large numbers of simultaneous systems at reasonable cost.
For that reason, the UHF band is expected to remain the
primary range for professional wireless audio use.
Frequency Selection
Selecting the operating frequency of a wireless audio 
system is a two-step process: first, choose an appropriate radio
frequency band; second, choose the appropriate operating
frequency (or frequencies) within that band. As indicated
above, there is a finite number of wireless microphone systems
that may be used simultaneously in any one frequency range.
The reasons for this limitation are several and they fall under 
the general topic of frequency coordination or "compatibility."
We will define these factors and examine each in terms of 
origin, effects, and relative importance to total system 
compatibility. In the first section we will consider only 
interactions that may occur between the individual wireless 
microphone systems themselves. Outside (non-system) 
interactions will be discussed in the second section.
At this point it should be stated that frequency 
coordination is a process that must take into account 
various factors including the physical (limitations), the
mathematical (calculations) and the political (regulations).
It is not necessary for most users to go through the details
of this process. Wireless manufacturers provide this service through pre-selected frequency groups and can also 
offer assistance in complex applications using proprietary
computer programs. What follows here is an introduction
to the process for the interested user.  
System Compatibility
The two main areas of concern are: interaction between
transmitters and receivers related to their operating 
frequencies, and interactions between transmitters and 
receivers related to their internal frequencies. The first class
of interactions is the more important one and may occur in
any group of wireless microphone systems. It is also the one
more cumbersome to calculate. The second class of interactions is less problematic and is also relatively easy to predict.
However, it is determined by specific system characteristics.  
Operating Frequency Interactions:
Intermodulation
A single wireless microphone system can theoretically
be used on any open operating frequency. When a second system is added it must be on a different operating 
frequency in order to be used at the same time as the first.
This limitation arises from the nature of radio receivers:
they cannot properly demodulate more than one signal on
the same frequency. In other words, it is not possible for a
receiver to "mix" the signals from multiple transmitters. 
If one signal is substantially stronger than the others it will
"capture" the receiver and block out the other signals. 
If the signals are of comparable strength none of them will
be received clearly.  
The effect of this is often heard in automobile radios
when travelling out of range of one station and into the
range of another station at the same frequency. The 
receiver will switch back and forth between the two 
stations as their relative signal strength changes, often with
considerable noise and distortion. The result is that neither
station is listenable when the signals are nearly equal.  
If the wireless microphone systems must be on 
different frequencies, how "different" should they be? The
limiting characteristic of the receiver in this regard is its 
"selectivity" or its ability to differentiate between adjacent 
frequencies. The greater the selectivity the closer together
the operating frequencies can be. The recommended 
minimum frequency difference ranges from 300kHz to 1.5
MHz, depending on receiver selectivity.  

When a third system is added to the group it must be
at least the recommended frequency difference from each
of the existing systems. However, it is now necessary to
consider other potential interactions between the transmitters
to insure that all three systems will be compatible with each
other. The most important type of interaction is called 
intermodulation (IM), and it arises when signals are applied
to "non-linear" circuits. (See Figure 3-4.)  
A characteristic of a non-linear circuit is that its output
contains "new" signals in addition to the original signals that
were applied to the circuit. These additional signals are
called IM products and are produced within the circuit 
components themselves. The frequencies of IM products
are mathematically related to the original transmitter 
frequencies. Specifically, they consist of sums and differences
of the original frequencies, multiples of the original 
frequencies, and sums and differences of the multiples.
Non-linear circuits are intrinsic to the design of wireless 
components and include the output stages of transmitters
and the input stages of receivers. The "mixer" stage at the 
receiver input is an example of a non-linear circuit: recall that
it is designed to produce a "difference" frequency that becomes
the intermediate frequency (IF) for subsequent stages.
IM can occur when transmitters are in close proximity to
each other. The signal from each transmitter generates IM
products in the output stage of the other. These new signals
are transmitted along with the original signals and can be
picked up by receivers operating at the corresponding IM 
frequencies. (See Figure 3-7.)
IM can also occur when transmitters are operated very
close to receivers.  In this case IM products are generated
in the receiver input stage which can interfere with the 
desired signal or be detected by the receiver if the desired
signal (transmitter) is not present.  
The strongest IM products are the two so-called 3rd 
order products produced by two adjacent transmitters 
operating at frequency f1 and frequency f2, where f1 is lower
than f2. The resulting IM products may be calculated as: 
IM1 = (2 x f1) – f2 
IM2 = (2 x f2) – f1
If the interval between f1 and f2 is F, then IM1 = f1 – F
and IM2 = f2 + F.  That is, one IM will appear exactly at 
interval F above the upper frequency f2 while the other IM
will appear exactly at interval F below the lower frequency.
For example, if f1 = 180MHz and f2 = 190MHz, then 
F = 10MHz. Thus, IM1 = 170MHz and IM2 = 200MHz.
(See Figure 3-5.)
In addition to IM products generated by interaction 
between two transmitters, other IM products are generated
by interaction between three transmitters in a similar 
fashion. (See Figure 3-6.)  In order to avoid potential IM
problems most manufacturers recommend a minimum
margin of 250 kHz (0.25 MHz) between any 3rd order 
27
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Figure 3-4: linear vs. non-linear circuits
Figure 3-5: two-transmitter intermodulation
Figure 3-6: three-transmitter intermodulation

IM product and any operating frequency. This further 
restricts available frequency choices as the number of 
simultaneous systems increases. 
It should be apparent from this discussion that the 
prediction of potential compatibility problems due to 
IM products is best left to computer programs. The 
complexity increases exponentially for additional systems:
a group of 10 wireless microphone systems involves 
thousands of calculations. See Appendix 1 for details on 
calculation of IMD products. 
Internal frequency Interactions:
LO, IF, Crystal Multipliers
In addition to frequency conflicts due to intermodulation
between operating frequencies there are certain other
sources of potential conflicts due to the various "internal" 
frequencies present in the normal operation of transmitters
and receivers. These differ from manufacturer to 
manufacturer and even from system to system from the
same manufacturer.  
One such source is the local oscillator (LO) of the 
receiver itself. Although this is a low-level signal which is 
generally confined within the receiver, it is possible for the
local oscillator of one receiver to be picked up by another
receiver tuned to that LO frequency if they or their 
antennas are in close proximity to each other (stacked, for
instance). For example, assuming a typical intermediate
frequency (IF) of 10.7 MHz, a receiver tuned to 200.7 MHz
would have its LO operating at 190.0 MHz. Another 
receiver tuned to 190 MHz should not be used close to the
first receiver because the second unit could pick up the
LO of the first, especially if the 190 MHz transmitter is
turned off or is operating at a great distance. (See Figure 
3-8.) Good design and shielding in receivers and physical
separation of receivers will minimize the possibility of LO 
interference. For multiple units, active antenna splitters will
effectively isolate antenna inputs from each other. 
However, it is still recommended that operating frequencies
be chosen to avoid LO frequencies by at least 250 KHz.
An "image" frequency is another source of possible 
interference. In a receiver, recall that the frequency of the
local oscillator (LO) always differs from the frequency of the
received signal by an amount equal to the intermediate 
frequency (IF). Specifically, the operating frequency is above
28
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Figure 3-8: local oscillator (LO) interference
Figure 3-7: two-transmitter IMD strength vs. 
transmitter separation

the local oscillator frequency by an interval equal to the IF.
When these two frequencies are applied to the mixer section
(a non-linear circuit) one of the output frequencies of the
mixer is this difference frequency (the IF), which is the tuned
frequency of the subsequent IF stage filters.
If the frequency of a second signal is at the same interval
below the local oscillator frequency, the difference between
this second frequency and the LO frequency would again be
equal to the intermediate frequency (IF). The mixer stage
does not discriminate between "positive" or "negative" 
frequency differences. If this second (lower) frequency enters
the mixer stage, it will result in another (difference) signal 
getting to the IF stages and causing possible interference.
This lower frequency is called the "image" of the original 
frequency. Again, assuming an IF of 10.7 MHz, a receiver
tuned to 200.7 MHz would have its LO at 190.0 MHz. 
A signal from another transmitter at 179.3 MHz would 
appear as an image frequency since it is 10.7 MHz below the
LO frequency or 21.4 MHz below the operating frequency.
The image frequency differs from the operating 
frequency by an amount equal to two times the intermediate
frequency (2 x IF). (See Figures 3-9 a & b.)  The image 
frequency will be below the operating frequency for a highside injection receiver and above the operating frequency
for a low-side injection receiver. Thus the image frequency
for the typical single conversion receiver is at least 20 MHz
away from the operating frequency. Double conversion 
receivers, which have a relatively high first IF (50 MHz 
typical), have image frequencies which are even farther
(>100 MHz typical) away from the operating frequency. In
most cases, the front end of the receiver should be able to
reject an image frequency unless it is extremely strong. 
Nevertheless, it is recommended that operating frequencies
be chosen to be at least 250 KHz from any image frequency.  
The last internal frequency issue concerns the VCO in
crystal controlled transmitters. Recall that the actual VCO
frequency is a relatively low radio frequency that is multiplied
to obtain the final transmitter frequency. A small amount of
the original crystal frequency remains after each multiplier
stage. Thus the output signal includes not only the final 
operating frequency but also low-level "spurs" or spurious
emissions due to the multipliers. These spurs occur above
and below the operating frequency at intervals equal to 
"harmonics" (multiples) of the original crystal frequency.  
For example, assuming a 9 x multiplier, a 180 MHz
transmitter would have a 20 MHz crystal frequency. This
would produce spurs at 160 MHz and 200 MHz, 140 MHz
and 220 MHz, etc. Good transmitter design will minimize
the amplitude of such crystal harmonics but, again, 
additional receivers should be chosen to avoid these 
frequencies by at least 250 KHz. (See Figure 3-10.)  
Frequency-synthesized transmitters do not produce
spurious emissions of this type because they do not employ
multipliers. However, both types of transmitters can 
produce other spurious emissions due to power regulating
circuitry, parasitic oscillations, carrier harmonics, etc. These
emissions can all be controlled through careful design.
It can be seen that the calculation of both local 
oscillator conflicts and image frequencies depends on the
intermediate frequency (IF) of the receiver while calculation
of crystal harmonics depends on the number of multipliers
in the transmitter. If receivers with different IFs or 
transmitters with different multipliers are being used together
(i.e. units from different manufacturers) this must be taken
into account in compatibility analysis. Unfortunately, only a
few proprietary computer programs for frequency selection
have this capability. Input to most of these programs 
assumes that all units are of the same design. For this 
reason, accurate prediction of compatibility between 
systems of different design is not always possible.
29
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Figure 3-9a: image frequency interference (low-side injection)
Figure 3-9b: image frequency interference (high-side injection)

Non-System Radio Interference
Even though a group of wireless microphone systems
may be carefully chosen to avoid mutual interference there
always exists the possibility of interference from non-system
sources. These sources fall into two categories: broadcast
(including television and other defined radio sources) and
non-broadcast (narrow band or broadband sources of radio
noise). We will look at each of these sources in terms of 
potential problems and possible solutions.  
Broadcast Television
In the US, and many other countries, broadcast 
television is undergoing a transition from analog to digital.
This transition affects wireless audio systems in several ways:
more "occupied" TV channels, no "open" space in DTV
channels, and future "re-allocation" of existing TV channels.
Nearly all full power television stations in the US are
now broadcasting only digital signals (DTV).  A few stations
(mainly along international borders) and some low-power
stations still broadcast an analog signal. Though both types
of signal occupy similar channel "blocks", the nature of the
signal within the channel is quite different.  An analog TV
transmission consists of three separate signals, each at a
specified carrier frequency within a 6 MHz block (in the
US).  (See Figure 3-11a.)  The picture or "video" information is an AM signal at 1.25 MHz above the bottom 
(low frequency end) of the block. The sound or "audio" 
information is an FM signal located at 0.25 MHz below the
top (high frequency end) of the block. The color or
"chroma" information is an AM signal at 3.58 MHz above
the video signal. The energy distribution and occupied
bandwidth of these three signals is not equal: the video 
signal has the highest power and widest bandwidth, 
followed by the audio signal and finally the chroma signal
with the lowest power and smallest bandwidth.
A digital TV transmission consists of a continuous signal
that occupies the entire 6 MHz block. (See Figure 3-11b.)
All of the video, audio, and color information is digitally 
encoded into this signal along with a variety of other data,
control, and secondary audio information. It is possible for
the DTV transmission to carry one high definition television
signal (HDTV) and/or multiple standard definition television
signals. The energy distribution within a DTV channel is 
essentially uniform. However, the average signal level of a
DTV transmission is somewhat less than the levels of the
video and audio signals in an analog TV transmission.
As indicated previously, the primary users of both highband VHF and low-band UHF frequencies are broadcast
television stations. In the US these are VHF TV channels 7
through 13 and now UHF TV channels 14 through 51.
Each TV channel is allotted a 6 MHz block for its 
transmission. (See Figure 3-12 for a diagram of designated
blocks.) VHF channel 7 begins at 174.0 MHz and extends
to 180.0 MHz, channel 8 occupies 180-186 MHz and so
on up to channel 13 at 210-216 MHz. UHF channel 14
occupies 470-476 MHz with successive channels up to
channel 51 at 692-698 MHz.
The 6 MHz/TV channel block is found in the US, the
rest of North America, South America and Japan. Other
countries, most of Europe and India for example, use a 
7 MHz/TV channel block, while France and China, among
others, use an 8 MHz/TV channel block. For analog 
transmission in these other systems, the video and audio
signals are located at the same frequencies relative to the
channel boundaries as in the 6 MHz systems, but the 
frequency of the chroma signal differs slightly in each to
accommodate the various color systems:  NTSC (6 MHz),
30
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Figure 3-10: crystal harmonics

PAL (7 MHz), and SECAM (8 MHz). DTV proposals for all
systems specify the appropriate TV channel block sizes. 
Traditionally, to avoid potential interference between
broadcast television stations, regulatory agencies have not
allowed adjacent analog TV channel operation in a given
geographic area. For example, in the US, if a local analog
TV channel 9 existed, then analog channels 8 and 10
would be vacant. These vacant channels could then be
used by wireless microphone systems with little concern
for television interference.
Historically, the prohibition of adjacent channels 
guaranteed the existence of certain vacant TV channels 
in a given area. The advent of DTV has removed this 
guarantee: DTV channels are allowed to exist adjacent to
each other and also adjacent to existing analog TV 
channels. This has resulted not only in more densely
spaced TV channels but also in difficulty using certain 
"pre-selected" frequency compatibility schemes.
The effects of interference from television broadcast
are dependent on the type of television signal (analog or
DTV) and the strength of the television signal, as well as
the location and the operating frequency of the wireless
microphone system. Direct conflicts with any of the three
signals that make up an analog TV transmission can produce noise, distortion, and short range or dropout.  Pickup
of the video or chroma signals (which are AM) may cause
distinct "buzz" in the wireless receiver, while pickup of the
audio signal (FM) may result in the TV sound being heard.  
Direct conflict with a DTV signal also causes short range
or dropouts. Though it is not possible for an analog receiver
to "hear" anything from a digital transmission, the DTV signal
acts as a very strong broadband radio noise source. In some
systems this may result in increased noise or distortion in
the audio output. Since there are no "unoccupied" 
frequencies in a DTV signal it is generally not possible to 
operate anywhere within a very strong DTV channel.
31
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Radio Astronom y
14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69
470-476
476-482
482-488
488-494
494-500
500-506
506-512
512-518
518-524
524-530
530-536
536-542
542-548
548-554
554-560
560-566
566-572
572-578
578-584
584-590
590-596
596-602
602-608
608-614
614-620
620-626
626-632
632-638
638-644
644-650
650-656
656-662
662-668
668-674
674-680
680-686
686-692
692-698
698-704
704-710
710-716
716-722
722-728
728-734
734-740
740-746
746-752
752-758
758-764
764-770
770-776
776-782
782-788
788-794
794-800
800-806
Auction
Public
Safety
DTV only
DTV only
DTV only
DTV only
698 MHz͞
ŽƌĞdsĂŶĚ͟͞
ϳϬϬD,ǌĂŶĚ͟
Figure 3-11b: digital television channel spectrum (DTV)
Figure 3-11a: analog television channel spectrum
Figure 3-12: DTV transition and 700 MHz Re-Allocation

32
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
The most effective solution for broadcast television 
interference is to avoid using frequencies of local active TV
channels. Television transmitters may operate at power 
levels up to several million watts while wireless microphone
systems typically have only less than 50 mW (fifty 
one- thousandths of one watt!) of output power. For this
reason it is unwise to choose wireless microphone system
frequencies that fall in an active local TV channel block.
"Local" is generally considered to be up to 50 or 60
miles, depending on the coverage area of the particular TV
transmitter and on the location of the wireless microphone
system. Indoor setups are at less risk than outdoor 
setups because building structures will usually strongly 
attenuate TV signals.  Nevertheless, since the locations and
assignments of television stations are well known it is 
relatively easy to choose wireless microphone system 
frequencies to avoid them in a particular area.
One consequence of the relatively dense TV channel
distribution in the US is that it is not generally possible 
to use a given set of wireless microphone frequencies 
everywhere in the country. As the distribution of vacant
channels changes from city to city it is almost inevitable that
a fixed-frequency system will experience interference from
a television station in some location. For this reason, nearly all
current wireless systems are “frequency-agile” (tuneable) so
that their operating frequencies may be changed as needed.  
Many manufacturers pre-select groups of wireless 
microphone system frequencies based on the availability of
locally vacant TV channels. If the TV channels are known
then it is relatively straightforward to choose appropriate
wireless frequencies for that location. Information on TV
channel distribution throughout the US is widely available
from manufacturers and other sources. It is usually 
sufficient to indicate the destination of the wireless 
equipment at the time that it is specified in order to avoid
broadcast television interference. 
Wireless Systems in the Post-DTV Transition Era 
In the United States, the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) has been supervising the transition
of broadcast television from its traditional analog 
format to an all-digital format (DTV). In the process, the 
commission has also been mandated to increase efficient use of TV spectrum and to increase the amount of 
spectrum available for public safety and other wireless 
services. Therefore, the transition has provided both 
consolidation of the broadcast spectrum and the 
reallocation of the resulting open spectrum for other uses.
The FCC has consigned all broadcast television into
a "core" band, TV Channels 2-51. All existing TV stations
above Channel 51 have migrated into the core band.
The upper frequency limit of the broadcast band is now
698 MHz and (nearly) all full-power TV stations are now
digital. All former television spectrum above Channel 51
(698-806 MHz) has now been reallocated for new 
services. This spectrum is generally referred to as the 
“700 MHz” band. Within the 700 MHz band, most of
this spectrum has been auctioned by competitive 
bidding to telecommunications companies while the
rest has been set aside for public safety services.
The telecommunications spectrum, 698-763 MHz
(roughly TV 52-62) and 775-793 MHz (roughly TV 6567), is being developed for various services such as
broadband internet access, streaming video, and other
digital data transmission. The public safety bands total
24 MHz in two "paired" bands: 763-775 MHz (roughly
TV 63-64) for fixed transmitters and 793-805 MHz
(roughly TV 68-69) for mobile transmitters.
For both statutory and practical reasons, the 
700 MHz band is no longer available for use by wireless
microphones or other wireless systems. Not only will
they no longer be authorized in this spectrum, but also
the interference from new services in this band will
make operation of such systems unreliable at best. For
this reason, manufacturers and distributors of wireless
systems in the US market are no longer supplying 
wireless systems in the 700 MHz band. New wireless 
systems continue to be available mainly in the core 
television band (TV 2-51) and in a few other narrow 
frequency bands.
Coordinating frequencies?
Looking for unoccupied television channels?
Check out: www.shure.com/frequency
or www.shure.com/faq
For a complete list of U.S. television frequencies...
see Appendix B on page 61.

33
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
"White Space Devices", now called Television Band
Devices (TVBD), are a new type of unlicensed radio
system intended primarily to increase wireless broadband Internet access. "White Space" refers to unused
TV channels in a given geographic area. Of course,
most professional wireless audio systems already 
operate on those same unused TV channels, raising
the possibility of interference from TVBD systems.
Though no such devices have been placed into public
use as yet, the FCC has defined the basic parameters
of TVBD operation to include significant protection
methods for existing wireless microphones.
A TVBD can be classified as a "fixed" device or a
"portable" device. A fixed TVBD can operate in a 
specific location at a power level up to 4 watts. 
However, a fixed TVBD cannot operate on or adjacent
to an active TV channel or public safety channel. 
By comparison, a portable TVBD can operate only at
a power level up to 100mW.  Though it also cannot
operate on an active TV channel, a portable TVBD can
operate adjacent to an active TV channel but at a 
reduced power of 40mW. Further, though a fixed
TVBD can operate throughout the UHF broadcast
range, a portable TVBD cannot operate in the TV14TV20 range.
The two principle protection methods required to be
implemented in TVBD operation are a "protected 
channel" plan and a "geo-location/database access"
plan. The protected channel plan is intended to provide
at least two TVBD-free TV channels at any location in
the US.  In most places, these two channels will be 
the first unused TV channel above TV37 and the first
unused TV channel below TV37. For example, in an
area with a local TV36 but no TV35, then TV35 would
be the protected channel below TV37. Similarly, in an
area with a local TV38 and TV39, but no TV40, 
then TV40 would be the protected channel above TV37.
In addition to the two defined protected TV 
channels, cities with TV stations and/or public safety
channels in the TV14-TV20 range may have additional
TVBD-free TV channels. This is because only fixed
TVBD devices can operate in this range, but they 
cannot operate adjacent to an active TV channel 
or public safety channel. In such a location, those 
adjacent channels would also be protected from 
TVBD activity.
The geo-location/database plan requires that
each TVBD incorporates the capability to accurately
know its geographic location and the capability to
access a database of excluded frequencies for that
location. Each time a TVBD is activated it must 
access the database before transmitting, as well as
at least once per day in continuous operation. The
database will include permanent exclusions such as
local active TV channels as well as the local 
protected channels defined above. The high-power
fixed TVBD must observe a 1 km exclusion zone
while the portable TVBD must maintain a 400m 
distance. 
Additionally, the database will list temporary 
exclusions to protect registered wireless systems 
operating on specific frequencies at specific times.
Both licensed and unlicensed wireless users may 
register frequencies in the database, though licensed
users will be allowed to register within 48 hours of 
an event while unlicensed users must register at least
30 days before their events. The database and 
its registration procedure are to be managed by 
independent entities approved by the FCC.
Note that the potential addition of TVBD operations
to the TV spectrum does not restrict the use of wireless
microphone systems to the "protected" TV channels.
Wireless microphones continue to be legal to operate
on any unused channel throughout the entire 
television band. However, the protected TV channels
offer a safe haven from TVBD interference for wireless
microphones operating in those channels, without the
necessity for registration. 
White Space Devices 

Broadcast Radio
High-band VHF wireless FM systems are not generally
subject to interference from commercial AM or FM radio
stations. Both bands are well below the VHF band and in
particular, these systems are not typically sensitive to 
moderate AM signals. UHF systems are even less likely to
respond to commercial radio sources since the UHF band
is >300 MHz above the top of the FM band. However, 
occasional interference, in the form of distortion or short
range, can occur in cases of extreme proximity to a 
high-power commercial radio transmitter.    
Other Radio Services
Direct pickup of 2-way radio, pagers, business band,
ham-radio etc. is rare. However, since some of these
sources can be quite strong locally there is the possibility
of interference due to intermodulation or if the source 
appears as an image frequency. For example, operating a
walkie-talkie near a wireless receiver can cause noise, 
distortion or apparent loss of range.  
In particular, the "travelling" wireless microphone 
system frequencies (169-172 MHz) share space with a
number of unpredictable primary users including 
government (Coast Guard, Secret Service), industry
(forestry, hydroelectric), land mobile and paging services.
Direct pickup or inter-modulation from these sources is
possible in this band.  Symptoms may again include noise,
loss of range or actual audio pickup.  
Of course nearby use of other (unexpected) wireless
microphone systems can create interference through 
inter-modulation or direct frequency conflict. Given the 
finite number of wireless frequencies available, especially
in the "travelling" channels, it is always possible to encounter
other wireless microphone users in locations such as hotels,
convention centers, sports facilities, and news events.
Remedies for such interference involve identifying the
interfering source if possible and relocating the source or
the wireless microphone system to reduce proximity. If this
is not sufficient it may be necessary to change the operating
frequency of the wireless microphone system especially if
the interfering source is a primary (licensed) user.  
Non-Broadcast Sources
Non-broadcast sources are those that produce radio 
frequencies only as a by-product of their operation. There are
three main types which are of concern to wireless use:  digital
audio/video devices, digital computers/controllers, and certain
AC power equipment. Digital audio devices include: digital 
signal processors (DSP’s) such as delays, reverbs, pitch
shifters; digital recording and playback devices such as 
DAT recorders, CD players, hard drive recorders and
samplers; digital electronic musical instruments such as
synthesizers, organs, and MIDI-controlled instruments. 
Digital video devices include cameras, camcorders, video
switchers, video DSPs, and video editing systems.
Digital computing devices include: microprocessor
equipped units (PC’s, calculators), minicomputers 
(workstations) and main-frame computers. In addition,
controllers for lighting, AV presentations, industrial equipment
and certain video equipment contain microprocessors.
Digital devices can produce broad band RFI (radio 
frequency interference) in close proximity to the source. Any
device which carries an FCC type approval label such as
"Class B computing device" can be assumed to be a 
potential source of interference. The audible effect is 
usually high frequency noise or distortion and it generally
only occurs when the receiver is close to the digital device
and the transmitter is at a distance. Unfortunately, this is often
the case when wireless receivers are located in or near racks
of digital gear while the transmitters are being used on a stage.  
The best remedy for this type of interference is to locate
the receivers and antennas at least several feet from any 
digital device.  In a rack of different equipment this would
suggest mounting the wireless receivers at the top, analog
equipment below that and digital equipment at the bottom.
In extreme cases, choosing higher wireless frequencies may
improve matters.  However, as the speed (clock frequency)
of digital equipment increases this technique will be 
less effective. 
Occasional sources of apparent interference are mobile
telephones and digital messaging products operating 
with GSM technology. Although transmit and receive 
frequencies of these devices are well outside the bands used
by wireless audio equipment they may still cause audible 
effects.  In particular, when GSM devices are in a “handshake”
mode or transmitting data, they produce high levels of RFI that
can be picked up directly by the audio circuits of wireless 
microphones as well as wired microphones and other audio
devices. This can result in a characteristic buzzing or 
“chirping” sound in the affected equipment.  Although newer
professional audio products are more resistant to this effect, the
best practice is to turn off any GSM mobile device that may 
be used within a few feet of any audio device. 
Finally, any equipment that uses or controls high 
voltage or high current AC power can generate radio 
frequency interference (RFI). Examples include lighting
dimmers and some types of gas discharge lamp supplies
such as neon or fluorescent ballasts.  
Audible effects of this type of source include buzz or hum
in the signal.  Again, the first remedy is to relocate the 
offending source or the wireless equipment to minimize
pickup.  In some cases special filtering may be applied to
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
34

the various power and connecting cables of both the
source and the wireless equipment to block RFI from 
leaving the source or entering the wireless equipment.  
A property of FM reception which can reduce the 
audibility of many types of interference is the so-called 
"capture effect." When multiple signals (close to the 
operating frequency) are present, the strongest signal will
capture or lock-in the receiver.  If the desired signal is 
sufficiently strong, the interfering signals may not be heard.
Since the strength of the desired signal (the transmitter) is
dependent on the operating distance, a nearby transmitter
can often overcome weak or distant interference sources.  
Range of Wireless Microphone Systems
A logical question concerning wireless performance is
the transmission range of various systems. Unfortunately,
the answer is much more complicated than a simple 
distance measurement. Ultimately, the receiver must be able
to pick up a "useable" signal from the transmitter. "Useable"
means that the strength of the desired signal is within the
sensitivity range of the receiver and further that it is 
sufficiently stronger than (or different from) undesirable signals and RF noise to produce an acceptable signal-to-noise
ratio at the audio output of the receiver. Elements that affect
useability are the transmitter/antenna, the transmission path,
the receiver/antenna and RFI. Some characteristics of these
elements are controllable, some are not. (See Figure 3-13.)  
Important transmitter characteristics are power output
and antenna efficiency. Maximum power is limited by 
government regulations and battery capability. Antenna 
efficiency is limited by size and design. Recall that the 
efficiency of typical wireless transmitter antennas is fairly
low, about 10% or less for VHF. This means that for a 50
mW VHF transmitter the effective radiated power (ERP) is
less than 5 mW. This may be further attenuated by 
proximity to the body or other lossy objects.  
Important receiver characteristics are antenna 
efficiency, receiver sensitivity and the ability of the receiver
to reject unwanted signals and noise. Antenna efficiency is
again limited by size and design but receiver antennas tend
to be much more efficient than transmitter antennas since
they can be made large enough to be better tuned to the
proper frequency. Other receiver characteristics are limited
by design.  Both elements are limited by cost.  
The transmission path is characterized by distance, 
intervening obstructions and propagation effects. Losses
due to these characteristics are generally frequency 
dependent:  the higher the frequency the greater the loss.
Once the operating frequency is chosen, only the path
length and antenna locations are controllable. These are
usually limited by the application itself. Under good 
conditions (line-of-sight) at a distance of about 100 ft.  the
field strength of the signal from a 50 mW transmitter is on
the order of 1000 uV/m, well within the range of sensitivity
of a typical receiver.  
Finally, RFI is characterized by its spectrum, that is, its
distribution of amplitude and frequency. It typically 
consists of both broadband noise and discrete frequencies.  However, its strength can be comparable to or greater
than the desired signal in poor conditions. Except for a few 
predictable sources it is largely uncontrollable.  
Rather than quote a specific maximum operating 
distance most manufacturers of wireless microphone 
systems give a "typical" range. For systems of the type 
discussed here (10-50 mW, VHF or UHF) the typical range
may vary from 100 ft. to 1000 ft. The lower number 
represents a moderately severe environment while the
upper figure might be achieved in absolute ideal 
conditions. Extremely poor conditions could result in a
range of only 50 feet or less. It is impossible to accurately
predict the range of an arbitrary wireless microphone 
system in an arbitrary application.
Spread Spectrum Transmission
A transmission technique that may have application 
to wireless microphone systems is known as "spread 
spectrum." The object of this technique is to improve 
performance by reducing interference effects and increasing efficiency of band utilization. Instead of concentrating the 
information and energy of the transmission at a single, 
continuous frequency, the signal is spread out over a wide
radio frequency range. The two most common methods are
"frequency hopping" and "direct sequence spreading."
Frequency hopping systems utilize a transmitter that
changes its operating frequency many times per second
according to a predetermined pseudo-random pattern.
The receiver is synchronized with the transmitter so that it
changes its operating frequency in exactly the same 
pattern. At any instant the system is operating on only one
Figure 3-13: loss vs. distance vs. frequency
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
35

36
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
frequency but over time the range of frequencies used
may be several MHz. The information may be carried as
an FM signal or as a digital signal. (See Figure 3-14.)  
Direct sequence systems operate around a center 
frequency but the effective total modulation (bandwidth) of the
signal is significantly increased. This is accomplished by 
modulating the phase of the carrier with a high-speed, predetermined pseudo-random digital sequence (pattern). Again
the receiver is synchronized with the transmitter according to
the same pattern. In this system the information can be carried as an analog FM signal or as a digital signal, mixed with
the phase modulating sequence. (See Figure 3-15.)
By spreading the transmission power of the desired signal
over a greater portion of the radio spectrum, the average 
energy of the desired signal at any one frequency is reduced.
This reduces the potential for interference from a particular
transmitter. In addition, the receiver becomes less sensitive to
undesirable radio sources at any one frequency because it
spreads the energy of the interfering source over a wider range
at much lower average level. It is not only possible to decrease
certain radio interference effects but also to increase the 
number of users that may operate in a given band.
Historically, this technique has been applied to 
communication and data transmission, particularly in military
applications. Presently it is found in some consumer 
cordless telephone equipment and has been used in at least
one MIDI wireless microphone system. However, current
spread spectrum technology may not lend itself to the 
highest fidelity audio transmission in a wireless microphone
package without significant tradeoffs in size and cost. 
Digital Wireless Systems
As other links in the audio chain have been converted
to the digital domain it is of interest to look at the impact of
digital technology on wireless transmission systems. Digital
techniques can be applied to professional wireless in 
several ways, each offering potential benefits. The first level
of application has been the use of digital control circuits
for various tasks such as frequency selection, diversity 
antenna switching and most display functions. Nearly all 
frequency-agile wireless systems benefit from the use of
digital controls and digital displays.
The next digital application level employs DSP 
(Digital Signal Processing) to replace traditional analog 
companding circuits. An audio DSP circuit is used in the
transmitter to optimize the input signal for transmission
and a complementary audio DSP is used in the receiver to 
optimize the output signal. The radio transmission path is
still in the analog domain. Benefits may include increased
audio dynamic range, decreased companding artifacts,
and wider frequency response.      
The highest level of digital implementation uses a fully
digital transmission path. The input signal is digitized in
the transmitter and remains in the digital domain until the 
receiver output. It is even possible to output a digital signal
from the receiver to subsequent digital equipment. 
Potential benefits of an all-digital wireless approach include
both improved audio quality and improved radio 
transmission. However, the technical requirements are 
not trivial and the inevitable compromise between 
performance and cost requires some difficult decisions.
In concept, fully digital wireless transmission is 
simple. Add an analog-to-digital (A/D) converter at the input
of the transmitter. Transmit the resulting digital information
to the receiver. Demodulate the digital information and add 
a complementary digital-to-analog (D/A) converter at the 
output of the receiver. The ultimate limitation lies in the
amount of digital information that must be reliably 
transmitted for acceptable audio quality.  
In general, information transmission techniques (wired
or wireless) must balance bandwidth limitations with 
hardware (and software) complexity. Bandwidth refers to
the range of frequencies and/or amplitudes used to convey
the information. In audio, a frequency range of 2020,000Hz and an amplitude range (dynamic range) of
120dB is perhaps the ultimate goal. However, a frequency
range of 300-3000Hz and a dynamic range of 30dB are
sufficient for telephone-quality speech. As expected, high
fidelity audio equipment tends to be more complex and
costly than telephone equipment.  
In analog FM radio systems, audio fidelity is greatly 
dependent on allowable deviation, which is related to RF
bandwidth:  wider deviation increases occupied bandwidth.
Walkie-talkies use less bandwidth than wireless
microphones.  Even so, bandwidth limitations necessitate
the use of companders to achieve acceptable dynamic
range in most high quality analog wireless systems.
Figure 3-15: direct sequence spectrum
Figure 3-14: frequency hopping spectrum

WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
The bandwidth required for a high fidelity digital 
wireless system depends on the amount of digital 
information transmitted and the transmission rate. 
In practice, the bandwidth is limited by physical and 
regulatory requirements. This effectively constrains the
amount and rate of information that can be transmitted.
Ultimately, the fidelity and reliability of a digital wireless 
system is limited by these same bandwidth restrictions.  
A digital representation of an analog signal is generated
by sampling the analog waveform at some rate. To avoid 
errors in the digital representation of an audio signal, the
sampling rate must be at least twice the highest audio 
frequency desired. Thus, digitizing a 20kHz audio signal
requires a sampling rate of at least 40kHz.  CD audio uses
a 44.1kHz sampling rate while advanced systems use
sampling rates of 48kHz or higher.
The measurement of each sample is represented by a
digital number. The resolution (accuracy) of this value is
proportional to the number of "bits" in the digital number,
where each bit can be "0" or "1". The greater the number
of bits, the more accurate is the sampled value. For 
example, an 8-bit sample represents 256 values, a 16-bit 
(CD quality) sample has 65,536 values, and a 24-bit 
sample represents more than 16 million values.   
The bit rate of a digital signal is the resolution multiplied
by the sampling rate. CD audio is 16 bits x 44.1kHz or
705.6k bits-per-second (bps). Higher performance digital
systems that operate at a resolution of 24 bits and a 
sampling rate of 48kHz generate a bit rate of 1152kbps.
In the simplest form of digital audio transmission, the 
required bandwidth of such a signal would be equal to the bit
rate. That is, to transmit CD-quality audio would require a
bandwidth of 705.6 kHz while a high performance signal
would require 1152kHz. Based on allowable occupied bandwidth limits, it is not possible (or legal) to transmit such a 
signal. For comparison, cellular telephones use 8-bit 
resolution and a 6kHz sample rate, resulting in a data rate of
only 48kbps. The resulting audio quality limitation is obvious.
To deliver the highest quality audio signal in a practical
digital wireless system, it is necessary to fit the transmitted
data within the allowable bandwidth limits using various
data management techniques. These techniques are 
implemented by first "coding" the data in the transmitter
and then "decoding" the transmitted data in the receiver.
This process is conceptually similar to "companding"
processes in analog FM systems, but here it is carried out
in the digital domain. Properly implemented, the resulting
audio can have wider frequency response, better dynamic
range, and less audible "artifacts" than traditional analog
systems.  In addition, the digital transmission scheme can
offer some improvement in radio performance as well as
the possibility of data encryption. 
The basic method of transmitting digital data in a radio
signal involves modulating the carrier in discrete steps, a
process called "shift keying". This can be done with 
frequency (Frequency Shift Keying or FSK), amplitude  
(Amplitude Shift Keying or ASK), or phase (Phase Shift 
Keying or PSK). If the shift key signal has two possible values
(corresponding to a bit value of "0" or "1") then the data rate
is equal to the bit rate. For example, a 2-FSK signal shifts
between two possible frequencies where one frequency 
represents a "0" and the other a "1". (See Figure 3-16.)
However, it is possible to send more than one bit per cycle
by coding multiple bits into "symbols". The symbol rate is
equal to the bit rate divided by the number of bits transmitted with each symbol.  
The theoretical occupied bandwidth of such a coded
digital transmission is now equal to the symbol rate. In this
way it is possible to transmit the same amount of data in
less bandwidth. For example, QPSK coding (Quadrature
Phase Shift Keying) has four possible values (00, 01, 10,
11) and can thus send two bits per symbol, resulting in
half the required bandwidth of a non-coded signal. (See
Figure 3-17.) Likewise, 8-PSK (Eight Phase Shift Keying)
has eight possible values (000, 001, 010, 011, 100, 101,
110, 111) accommodating three bits per symbol, thus 
reducing the required bandwidth to one-third of a noncoded signal.  
Figure 3-16: 2FSK
Figure 3-17: QPSK
37

38
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
However, even with the reduced bandwidth requirements of higher order symbol coding techniques it is still
not generally possible to transmit the entire data stream
within the available bandwidth. To reduce the data rate 
to manageable size some form of data compression 
must be employed.
Data compression schemes can be characterized as
"lossless" or "lossy". A lossless scheme reduces the data
stream by coding redundant data into shorter forms. 
Decoding "lossless" compressed data will exactly restore
the entire original data stream. Lossless compression 
is effective on data that exhibits significant redundancy
such as text, spreadsheets, and certain graphic files. 
It does not provide a high degree of compression on 
typical digital audio data. 
A lossy data compression scheme discards a certain
amount of the original data stream, generally the "least 
significant" parts. For audio data, there are various 
methods that rely on the characteristics and limitations of
human audio perception. The best lossy compression
schemes result in audio that is nearly indistinguishable
from the original. However, each method involves tradeoffs between the degree of compression, audio quality, and
processing time (latency).
The algorithm (mathematical formula) used in a 
particular data compression scheme is called a "codec"
(code – decode), indicating the two-step nature of the
process. Examples of codecs used in digital audio 
recording are MP3 and AAC. Each of these has selectable
bit rates, the lowest offering small file size with reduced 
fidelity and the highest offering improved audio fidelity at
the expense of larger file size.  
However, these standard codecs are relatively slow, 
introducing latency (delay) of up to 100ms in the process.
In addition to the codec, other sources of latency include
A/D and D/A converters, as well as other DSP elements.
Though this may not be a problem in a music playback
system, it would be unacceptable for a live performance
wireless audio system. In live audio applications, latency
must be kept as short as possible, ideally less than 5ms.
Above 5ms, the latency becomes generally noticeable and
when it exceeds 20ms, musical timing can be affected.
For comparison, cellular telephone connections may have
latency greater than 200ms. This leads to well-known effects such as unnatural pauses in conversation and the tendency for each person to speak over the words of the other.    
Professional digital wireless systems use specialized
codecs that are capable of excellent audio quality and low
latency within allowable radio bandwidth limitations. For
example, in the 900MHz band, the allowable bandwidth is
about 500kHz. Assuming a simple 1-bit per symbol 
transmission, an 1152kbps data stream (48kHz x 24 bit)
will require about 3:1 data compression (1152 / 3 =
384kbps). In the standard UHF broadcast band, the 
allowable bandwidth is less than 200kHz. Again, assuming
standard coding, the same 1152kbps data stream may 
require as much as 9:1 data compression.
A typical transmit coding scheme involves digitally 
dividing the full audio bandwidth into a number of subbands. Each sub-band is processed separately to deliver
the desired amount of data compression. The sub-band
data are assembled into a digital data stream which is used
to modulate the transmitter output. Depending on allowable
bandwidth and other limitations, the modulation is typically
FSK or PSK.  
In the matching receiver, the incoming data stream is
disassembled into corresponding sub-band data. Each
sub-band is decoded to reproduce its original counterpart.
Finally, the decoded sub-band data are combined to 
reconstruct the original full-bandwidth audio signal. 
It should be noted that the parameters for each element in
this process have to be very carefully chosen to achieve
the highest audio quality and the lowest latency consistent
with both hardware and software limitations.
One necessary addition to the data stream is control
and timing information to achieve synchronization between
the transmitter and receiver processes. Other transmitted
data may include battery condition, transmitter type, gain
settings, and data encryption settings. A certain amount of 
bandwidth is always required for these functions, further
limiting the maximum data rate. 
The final consideration for digital systems is data 
transmission error. The integrity of the transmitted data
stream can be adversely affected by radio interference,
multi-path, signal fading, etc. The likelihood of errors 
also increases with the complexity of the transmission
scheme. To reduce the effects of data loss, various error 
management techniques are employed. Some of these 
involve transmitting extra data to provide not only a means
of detecting data loss but also a means of correcting some
of those losses. However, since error correction methods
may increase occupied bandwidth as well as processing
complexity/latency, complete error elimination is not 
possible. Nevertheless, practical digital wireless system can
be made very robust in the presence of transmission errors
and able to recover gracefully from any severe data loss.
The general design of a digital audio transmitter begins
with an analog audio preamp followed by an initial ADC
(analog-to-digital converter). The resulting uncompressed
digital data stream passes to a DSP that performs the 
necessary data compression such as the sub-band coding
described above.  The digital data is processed into a stream

39
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Operation of Wireless Systems
Outside of the U.S.
Allocation and regulation of radio frequencies is 
supervised by specific government agencies in each 
country, with the result that allowable (legal) frequencies
and frequency bands differ from country to country. In 
addition to frequency, these agencies typically specify
other aspects of the equipment itself. They include: 
allowable transmitter power, maximum deviation (for
FM), spurious emissions, etc. These specifications may 
differ from one band to another and may further differ
from one type of user to another within the same band.
For this reason, it is not possible to select a specific 
frequency or even frequency band that is (legally) 
useable in all parts of the world. Furthermore, it is not
possible to design a single type of wireless equipment
that will satisfy the specifications of all or even most of
these agencies around the globe.
of digital "words" that contain the coded audio as well as 
timing and error correction information which is then passed
to the RF transmitter section. The data must pass through a
DAC (digital-to-analog converter) near the end of this process
because the actual transmitter is an analog device. In some
designs the DAC is part of the DSP device while in others it
is part of the transmitter itself. The transmitter is tunable by
means of a frequency-synthesized VCO that can produce
an AM, FM, or PM output as needed. Finally, an RF amplifier
provides the necessary output power. (See Figure 3-18.)
The general design of a digital audio receiver begins
with an analog front-end filter followed by a single analog
down-conversion stage. This stage is tunable by means of
a frequency-synthesized local oscillator. The resulting 
intermediate frequency signal is very precisely filtered and
passed to an ADC.  The digital data stream passes to a DSP
that established proper timing for decoding the sub-band
information, applies error correction, and reconstructs the
original digital audio data.  A final DAC produces the analog signal for the audio output amplifier. Again, the DSP
process may consist of multiple devices. (See Figure 3-19.)
Figure 3-20: international wireless frequencies
Figure 3-18: frequency-synthesized digital transmitter
Figure 3-19: frequency-synthesized digital receiver

CHAPTER FOUR
WIRELESS SYSTEM SELECTION AND SETUP
System Selection
The proper selection of a wireless microphone system
consists of several steps based on the intended application
and on the capabilities and limitations of the equipment
required for that application. It should be remembered that
while wireless microphone systems cannot ultimately be
as consistent and reliable as wired systems, the 
performance of currently available wireless can be very
good, allowing excellent results to be obtained. Following
these steps will insure selection of the best system(s) for a
given application.
1) Define the application. This definition should include
the intended sound source (voice, instrument, etc.) and the
intended sound destination (sound system, recording or
broadcast). It must also include a description of the physical
setting (architectural and acoustic features). Any special 
requirements or limitations should also be noted:  cosmetics,
range, maintenance, other possible sources of RF interference,
etc. Finally, the desired performance level must be defined:
radio quality, audio quality, and overall reliability.
2) Choose the microphone (or other source) type.
The application will usually determine which microphone
physical design is required: a lavaliere or clip-on type 
attached to clothing, or a head-worn type, both for 
hands-free use; a handheld type for a vocalist or when the
microphone must be passed around to different users; a
connecting cable when an electric musical instrument or
other non-microphone source is used. Other microphone
characteristics (transducer type, frequency response, and
directionality) are dictated by acoustic concerns. As 
mentioned earlier, the microphone choice for a wireless
application should be made using the same criteria as for
a wired application.
3) Choose the transmitter type. The microphone choice
will usually determine the required transmitter type (handheld, bodypack or plug-on), again based on the application.
General features to consider include: antenna style (internal
or external), control functions and location (power, muting,
gain, tuning), indicators (power, battery condition), batteries
(operating life, type, accessibility), and physical description
(size, shape, weight, finish, material). For handheld and plugon types interchangeability of microphone elements may be
an option. For bodypack transmitters, inputs may be hardwired or detachable. Multi-use inputs are often desirable and
may be characterized by connector type, wiring scheme and
electrical capability (impedance, level, bias voltage, etc.).
4) Choose the receiver type. The basic choice is 
between diversity and non-diversity. For reasons 
mentioned in the receiver section above, diversity receivers
are recommended for all but the most budget-conscious 
applications. Though non-diversity types will work well in
many situations, the insurance provided by the diversity 
receiver against multipath problems is usually well worth
the somewhat higher cost. Other receiver features that
should be considered are: controls (power, output level,
squelch, tuning), indicators (power, RF level, audio level,
frequency), antennas (type, connectors), electrical outputs
(connectors, impedance, line/microphone/headphone
level, balanced/unbalanced). In some applications battery
power may be required.
5) Determine the total number of systems to be used 
simultaneously. This should take into account future 
additions to the system: choosing a system type that can
only accommodate a few frequencies may prove to be an
eventual limitation. Of course, the total number should 
include any existing wireless microphone systems with
which the new equipment must work.
6) Specify the geographic location in which these 
systems will be used. This information is necessary in the
next step to avoid possible conflict with broadcast television
frequencies.  In the case of touring applications, this may
include cities inside and outside of the US.
7) Coordinate frequencies for system compatibility and
avoidance of known non-system sources. Consult the 
manufacturer or a knowledgeable professional about 
frequency selection and integration of the planned number
of systems. This should be done even for single systems
and must certainly be done for any multiple system 
installation to avoid potential interference problems. 
Frequency coordination includes the choice of operating
band (VHF and/or UHF) and choice of the individual 
operating frequencies (for compatibility and avoidance of
other transmissions). For fixed locations choose frequencies
in unused TV channels. For touring applications, it may 
be necessary to carry additional systems on alternate 
frequencies, though this is only practical for a small number
of channels. The preferred approach for touring is to use frequency-agile (tuneable) units to insure the required 
number of systems at all venues. 
8) Specify accessory equipment as needed. This may
include remote antennas (1/2 wave, 5/8 wave, directional),
mounting hardware (brackets, ground-planes), antenna
splitters (passive, active), and antenna cables (portable,
fixed). These choices are dependent on operating 
frequencies and the individual application.
PART TWO: Wireless Microphone Systems: How To Make Them Work
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
40

Crystal-Controlled vs. Frequency Synthesis
Crystal controlled wireless units can be designed with
wide audio frequency response, low noise, low distortion,
and relatively long battery life. They are the most costeffective choice for fixed frequency applications involving
a moderate number of simultaneous systems. One 
limitation inherent to a crystal controlled transmitter is the
generation of spurious emissions due to output multiplier
stages, though these can generally be kept to a minimum
with careful design.
For tuneable systems, frequency synthesis is the most
practical technique.  The absence of spurious emissions
from the transmitter also simplifies coordination of multiple
systems. However, it is more difficult (and more expensive)
to design equally low noise, low distortion frequency 
synthesized systems.  A limitation inherent to the audio 
frequency response of this type of transmitter results from
the use of a sharp lo-cut filter to prevent very low audio 
frequencies from interfering with the PLL control circuit.
This places a lower limit on the audio frequency range that
may be transmitted. Special techniques are required to
achieve extended low frequency response in frequency synthesized systems. 
Due to continuing improvements in design and 
manufacture of wireless products, most wireless 
microphone systems are now frequency-agile. The ability to
tune away from interfering signals and the improved ease of
multiple system frequency coordination are now available
even in relatively low-cost products. In addition, 
automatic scanning and frequency selection are standard
on many of these systems. For these reasons, frequencyagile systems are preferred for most applications, not only for
touring but for fixed installations as well.
As in the choice of other wireless microphone system
characteristics above, it is necessary to evaluate the 
application to determine which frequency generation
method is preferable. Frequency synthesized systems must
be considered when frequency agility is a primary 
requirement or if there are other included features that are
desirable for the application.
Once the wireless microphone system(s) choice is
made, careful setup and proper use are necessary to 
obtain the best performance.
System Setup: Transmitter
Transmitter setup first requires optimizing the source-totransmitter interface. Sources include dynamic and 
condenser microphones, electronic musical instruments
and general audio sources such as mixer outputs, 
playback devices, etc. The output signal of each of these
sources is characterized by its level, impedance and 
configuration (balanced or unbalanced). For sources such
as condenser microphones, some type of power (phantom
or bias) may be required.
The transmitter may be a bodypack, plug-on or handheld type and its input will also have a characteristic level,
impedance and configuration (balanced or unbalanced). It
may be capable of supplying power to the source. The 
interface can consist of some type of connector or it may be
hard-wired, either internally or externally. (See Figure 4-1.)
The simplest interface is the handheld transmitter. This
design should insure that the microphone element is 
already optimally integrated (electrically and mechanically)
with the transmitter. The only choice involves systems 
that offer a selection of microphone elements. If each is
equipped for proper interface the decision should be 
made based on the performance characteristics of the 
microphone element for the intended application.
The plug-on transmitter offers a range of interface 
possibilities. Mechanically, the 3-pin XLR type connector is
standard but the electrical characteristics of the chosen
microphone and transmitter combination must be 
considered. The input impedance of the transmitter should
be higher than the microphone output impedance. 
All transmitters of this type will work with typical lowimpedance dynamic microphones. If the transmitter 
input impedance is high enough (>10,000 ohms) a high 
impedance microphone may also be used. Most plug-on
transmitters will work with either balanced or unbalanced
microphone outputs.
Some plug-on transmitters are also capable of 
supplying "phantom power" to a condenser microphone.
This is only possible with a balanced transmitter input and
a balanced microphone output.  Even then, the transmitter
must supply at least the minimum phantom voltage 
Figure 4-1: examples of transmitters 
(left to right: handheld, bodypack, plug-on)
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
41

required by the microphone (usually between 11 and 52
volts DC). If less than the minimum is available, 
the condenser microphone performance may be 
compromised with less headroom or more distortion. This
is not a concern with dynamic microphones (which do not
require power) or with condenser microphones powered
by an internal battery.
The bodypack transmitter presents the greatest range
of possible interfaces. The simplest arrangement is the
hard-wired lavaliere or headset microphone. Again, it can
usually be assumed that this design already provides the
optimum interface for the components provided. If various
hardwired microphone choices are offered, the selection
should be based on the intended application.
Most bodypack transmitters are equipped with an input
connector to allow the use of a variety of microphones and
other input sources. (See Figure 4-2.) Microphones and
input cables supplied by a manufacturer with a given 
wireless microphone system can be assumed to be 
compatible with that system. However, they may not be 
directly compatible with wireless microphone systems from
other manufacturers. At a minimum, a connector change is
often required. In many cases, additional circuitry or 
modifications to components will be necessary. A few 
combinations simply will not work.
In order to determine the suitability of a particular 
microphone for use with a particular transmitter it is first
necessary to determine the connector type(s) involved.
Connectors include eighth-inch and quarter-inch phone
jacks as well as a variety of multi-pin designs.
Next, the wiring of the microphone connector and the
wiring of the transmitter connector must be compared.
Unfortunately, there is no standard input connector, and
further, the wiring scheme of the same connector may 
differ from one manufacturer to another. A quarter-inch
input jack is usually wired unbalanced with the audio 
signal at the tip and shield on the sleeve. The typical multipin input on a body-pack transmitter has at least one pin
for the audio signal and one pin for shield or ground. There
may be other pins to provide "bias" (a DC voltage for a 
condenser microphone element) or to provide an alternate
input impedance.  Some transmitters have additional pins
to accept audio signals at different levels or to provide a
combination audio + bias for certain condenser elements.
The electrical characteristics of the microphone and
transmitter should then be compared: the output level of the
microphone should be within the acceptable input level
range of the transmitter and the output impedance of the
microphone should be less than the input impedance of 
the transmitter. In addition, the input configuration of most
bodypack units is unbalanced. Microphones intended for
use with wireless are also invariably unbalanced, though 
a balanced output dynamic microphone can usually be 
accommodated with an adapter cable.
If the microphone has a condenser element and does
not have its own power source then the transmitter must
supply the required bias voltage. Most transmitters 
provide about 5 VDC, suitable for a typical electret 
condenser element, though some elements may require
as much as 9 VDC.  In this case, it is sometimes possible
to modify the transmitter to provide the higher voltage.
Many condenser elements and associated transmitters
use a two-conductor-plus-shield hookup in which the 
audio is carried on one conductor and the bias 
voltage on the other. A few condenser elements and 
some transmitters use a single-conductor-plus-shield 
arrangement in which the audio and bias voltage are 
carried on the same conductor.  Interfacing a microphone
of one scheme with a transmitter of the other may require
modification of one or both components.
In general, for non-standard combinations, it is best to 
directly contact the manufacturer of the wireless microphone
system and/or the manufacturer of the microphone to 
determine the compatibility of the desired components. 
They can provide the relevant specifications and can usually
describe any limitations or necessary modifications.
Non-microphone sources include electronic musical 
instruments and possibly outputs from sound systems and
playback devices. Though none of these sources require bias
or phantom power their interface presents a much wider range
of level and impedance than a typical microphone source.
Musical instruments such as electric guitars and
basses can have output levels from a few millivolts 
(microphone level) for instruments with passive pickups to
a few volts (line level) for those with active pickups The
transmitter must be capable of handling this dynamic
range to avoid overmodulation or distortion.
Ordinary (passive) magnetic instrument pickups have a
high output impedance and require a transmitter input 
impedance of about 1 Megohm to insure proper frequency
response.  Active (powered) pickups have fairly low output 
impedance and will work with almost any transmitter input 
impedance of 20,000 ohms or greater.  Piezoelectric pickups
1/4”
mini XLR
Lemo
Figure 4-2: examples of input connectors
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
42

have very high output impedance and require a 1-5 Megohm
transmitter input impedance to avoid loss of low frequencies.
Mixers and playback devices produce line level 
outputs. These sources typically have low-to-medium 
output impedance and may be balanced or unbalanced.
They can sometimes be interfaced with a simple adapter
cable. However, these high level input sources often 
require additional (external or internal) attenuation to 
prevent overload of the transmitter input, which is usually
expecting a mic-level signal.
Once the source/transmitter interface has been optimized,
control adjustment should be performed. The only control 
adjustment available on most transmitters is for input level or
sensitivity. It consists of a small potentiometer and/or a switch.
The control is often placed inside the battery compartment or
in a recessed position to avoid accidental maladjustment.
Some bodypack designs have separate level adjustments for
microphone inputs and instrument inputs.
The control(s) should be adjusted so that the loudest
sound level (or highest instrument level) in actual use 
produces full modulation of the radio signal. This is usually
determined by speaking or singing into the microphone 
(or playing the instrument) while observing audio level 
indicators on the receiver. Typically, an audio peak LED will
indicate full (or nearly full) modulation. A few designs have
peak indicators on the transmitters themselves. In systems
that indicate peaks at less than full modulation, this LED
may light fairly often. For systems that indicate full 
modulation, this should light only briefly at maximum input
levels. In either case, sustained peak indication requires 
reducing input sensitivity or level to avoid audible distortion.
If the transmitter is equipped with a compander system
(noise reduction) defeat switch make sure that it is set to
the same mode as the receiver. The only situation in which
this system would be defeated is with the use of a 
receiver that is not equipped with compander circuitry.
For tuneable transmitters, make sure that the 
transmitter is set to the same frequency as the receiver.
The last step in transmitter setup is placement. 
Placement of a handheld or plug-on system is essentially
the same as for a wired microphone of the same type. The
unit may be mounted on a stand, boom or fishpole with an
appropriate stand adapter, or it may be handheld.
Bodypack transmitter placement is dependent on the
particular application. If the input source is a microphone,
such as a lavaliere or headset, the bodypack is normally
clipped to a belt or pants waistband. It may be attached in
other ways as long as the antenna is allowed to extend freely.
Insure that there is adequate access to the controls if 
necessary and that the connecting cable, if any, has enough
length to permit the source and the transmitter to be located
as desired. When the input is a musical instrument, it is
often possible to attach the transmitter directly to the 
instrument or to its strap as in the case of an electric guitar.
For all types of transmitters, insure that the antenna is
securely attached and positioned for maximum efficiency.
Wire antennas should be fully extended. The hand should
not cover external antennas on handheld transmitters. 
(See Figure 4-3.)
As much as possible, proper transmitter placement should
avoid large metal objects and previously mentioned sources of
RF such as digital devices, other wireless transmitters and 
mobile telephones. If an individual is using more than one 
wireless system at the same time, such as a wireless head-set
and a wireless musical instrument, or is wearing a wireless 
personal monitor receiver, the devices should be kept as far
apart as practical to minimize interaction.
System Setup: Receivers
Receiver setup involves two interfaces: antenna-toreceiver and receiver-to-sound system. (See Figure 4-4.)
Figure 4-4: receiver examples
fixed
portable
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
43
NO
✓OK
Figure 4-3: proper and improper antenna positions

44
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Audio Interface
Here we will discuss 
the sound system interface. 
Remember that the basic
function 
of 
a 
wireless 
microphone system is to 
replace the connecting cable
between the source and the
sound system. In the typical
case, the output of the wireless receiver will resemble the output of the original source both electrically and physically. That
is, most wireless microphone receivers have a balanced, low
impedance, microphone level output, usually on a standard
3-pin XLR-type audio connector. This can be connected to a
standard microphone input of a sound system using an 
ordinary balanced microphone cable. (See Figure 4-5.)
Some receivers, particularly those designed for use with
electric instruments, may be equipped with a quarter-inch
phone jack instead of (or in addition to) an XLR connector.
Normally, this output is an unbalanced, low or medium 
impedance, microphone or instrument level signal. It can
be directly connected to the input of an instrument amplifier
using a standard shielded instrument cable.
In addition, a few receivers have line level outputs available.
These can be connected to line or aux level inputs of sound
systems equipped with similar types of input connectors.
If it is desired (or necessary) to connect one type of 
output to a different type of input a few possibilities should
be considered. For a balanced XLR output to an 
unbalanced quarter-inch input an adapter which connects
Pin 2 of the XLR to the tip of the phone plug and connects
Pin 1 and Pin 3 of the XLR to the sleeve of the phone plug
may be used. A similar adapter (with appropriate XLR 
connector) may be used to connect an unbalanced quarter-inch output to a balanced XLR input.  Simple adapters
of this type will usually work if the levels and impedances
of the outputs and inputs are compatible.
In some cases simple adapters cannot be used due to
significant impedance or level differences. In addition, the
quarter-inch phone-to-XLR hookups just described (which
cause the circuit to be unbalanced) can occasionally 
create audible hum problems due to ground loops between
the receiver and the sound system. In either case, the use
of a transformer may offer a solution. It can provide the
proper transition between different impedances and 
between balanced and unbalanced circuits. The transformer
also allows ground loops to be eliminated by lifting the 
shield connection at the source end of the balanced cable.
Finally, the presence of phantom power at the 
balanced microphone input of the sound system must be
considered. If the receiver output is unbalanced, phantom
power may cause noise or distortion in the signal. Phantom
power should be turned off at that input if possible. If not,
a suitable transformer or an adapter with capacitors will
block the voltage in the connecting path. However, if the 
receiver output is balanced, phantom power is usually not
a problem though a manufacturer may specify the 
maximum voltage that the receiver can tolerate. A few 
receivers present a significant load to the phantom source.
This can result in a lowering of the phantom voltage at
other inputs on a mixer that has insufficient isolation of the
phantom supply between inputs.
Once the receiver has been properly connected, then the
sound system controls may be set. The first control adjustment on a receiver is the output level. This usually consists
of a rotary pot and possibly a switch to select microphone or
line level. The general procedure is to set the output level so
that it is approximately the same as that of a wired source of
the same type. This will provide normal gain structure in the
rest of the sound system. Though microphone level is most
common, line level can be appropriate for long cable runs or
for driving line level devices such as equalizers, crossovers or
power amplifiers. On most receivers, the audiolevel indicators
are pre-volume control and are unaffected by receiver 
volume control settings. Use the indicators on subsequent 
equipment to gauge the actual output level.
Squelch Adjustment
Another receiver adjustment is the squelch control.  
Recall from the previous discussion that the function of the
squelch circuit is to mute the audio output of the receiver
when the transmitted signal is lost or becomes unacceptably noisy. Depending on the type of squelch system used
(threshold squelch, noise squelch, tone-key squelch) the
adjustment procedure will vary:
If a simple threshold squelch is used, adjustment may
be required if the radio background noise level changes 
substantially. This would be indicated by loud "white noise"
from the receiver output when the transmitter is turned off
or drops out.  
If noise squelch is used, no adjustment is normally 
necessary.  Noise squelch mutes the receiver based on the
signal-to-noise quality of the audio signal. The receiver 
VHF
UHF
antenna 
inputs
audio 
outputs
Figure 4-5: examples of receiver audio output and antenna input connectors

WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
will generally not produce noise in the absence of the
transmitter signal. Setting the squelch above the default
position will force the receiver to mute for mildly noisy 
signals, which will reduce the effective range somewhat.
Setting the squelch below the default position will allow a
noisier signal to be received, which may increase the 
effective range.
A receiver equipped with a tone-key squelch system also
does not normally require adjustment. The receiver will only 
respond to a signal that contains the appropriate pilot "tone."
The squelch may be varied from its default position with the
same results as for the noise squelch system above.
Other receiver controls may include monitor (headphone)
level, indicator selectors, channel selectors, etc. These may
be set as desired for a particular application. If there is a
compander (noise reduction) defeat switch, make sure that
it is set to the same mode as the transmitter. Again, there is
no reason to defeat the compander in the receiver unless
the transmitter is not equipped with compander circuitry. If
the receiver is tuneable, make sure that it is set to the same
frequency as the transmitter. Some receivers are now 
capable of automatically scanning for a clear channel.
Receiver Mounting and Placement
Proper placement of receivers involves both mechanical
and electrical considerations. Mechanically, wireless 
receivers are usually designed to be used like other standard
rackmount products. The electrical concerns are possible
RF interference and possible hum or other electrical noise
induced in the audio circuits. Receivers should be kept 
away from RF noise sources such as digital processors, 
computers and video equipment. They should also be 
separated from large AC sources such as power supplies
for high current or high voltage equipment as well as lighting dimmers, fluorescent light ballasts and motors.
If wireless receivers are mounted in racks with other
equipment it is best to place them with low-power analog
devices nearby and potentially troublesome devices farther
away or in a separate rack. In particular, if other wireless
transmitting devices such as personal monitor transmitters
or wireless intercom transmitters are used, it is strongly 
recommended that they be mounted in a different rack.
Antennas from these transmitters should also be at a 
sufficient distance from receiver antennas. Obviously, if 
receivers are placed in metal racks or mounted between
other metal devices it will be necessary to make sure that
antenna function is not compromised.
System Setup: Receiver Antennas
Setup of receiver antennas involves first the antenna-toreceiver interface and then antenna placement. The simplest
case is a receiver with the antenna(s) permanently attached.
The antenna is typically a quarter-wave telescoping or possibly
"rubber ducky" type. Receivers with non-detachable antennas
should be placed on an open surface or shelf, in line-of-sight
to the transmitter, for proper operation. They are often not suitable for rack mounting except perhaps as a single unit at the
top of a rack and then only if the antennas are mounted on the
front of the receiver or can project through the top of the rack.
45
The threshold type squelch adjustment procedure is:
1)
Turn the transmitter power off to eliminate the 
desired signal.
2)
Turn on all associated equipment in nearby 
locations to create the "worst-case" signal condition.
3)
Set the receiver volume control to minimum to
avoid excessive noise in the sound system.
4)
Turn the receiver power on.
5)
Observe the RF and audio indicators on the receiver.
6)
If the indicators are showing a no-signal 
condition the squelch setting may be left as-is.
7)
If the indicators are showing a steady or 
intermittent signal-received condition increase the
squelch control setting until a no-signal condition is
indicated. Set the squelch control slightly past this
point to provide a threshold margin.
8)
If the no-signal condition cannot be achieved even
with high squelch settings, it may be 
possible to find and eliminate the undesirable 
signal. Otherwise, it may be necessary to 
select a different operating frequency.
9)
Turn the transmitter power on.
10) Make sure that the receiver indicates a signalreceived condition with the transmitter at normal
operating distance. Remember that high squelch
settings reduce the operating distance.
✓OK
Figure 4-6: proper and improper antenna and receiver placement

A receiver with detachable antennas offers more 
versatility in setup. In most cases the antennas attach to the
rear of the receiver.  If the receiver is to be mounted in a
metal rack the antennas must be brought to the outside of
the rack. Some designs allow the antennas to be moved to
the front of the receiver, while others provide an 
accessory panel for antenna relocation. Again, the receiver
should be mounted high enough in the rack so that the
antennas are essentially in the open.
Here are some general rules concerning setup and use
of receiver antennas:  
1) Maintain line-of-sight between the transmitter and 
receiver antennas as much as possible, particularly for UHF
systems. Avoid metal objects, walls, and large numbers of
people between the receiving antenna and its associated
transmitter.  Ideally, this means that receiving antennas
should be in the same room as the transmitters and elevated
above the audience or other obstructions. (See Figure 4-6.)
2) Locate the receiver antenna so that it is at a 
reasonable distance from the transmitter. A minimum 
distance of about 5 meters is recommended to avoid 
potential intermodulation products in the receiver. The
maximum distance is not constant but is limited by 
transmitter power, intervening objects, interference, and
receiver sensitivity. Ideally, it is better to have the 
antenna/receiver combination closer to the transmitter
(and run a long audio cable) than to run a long antenna
cable or to transmit over excessively long distances.
3) Use the proper type of receiver antenna. A quarterwave antenna can be used if it is mounted directly to the
receiver, to an antenna distribution device or to another
panel, which acts as a ground-plane. If the antenna is to be
located at a distance from the receiver, a half-wave 
antenna is recommended. This type has somewhat 
increased sensitivity over the quarter-wave and does not
require a ground-plane. For installations requiring more
distant antenna placement or in cases of strong interfering
sources it may be necessary to use a directional (Yagi 
or log-periodic) antenna suitably aimed. Telescoping 
antennas should be extended to their proper length.  
4) Select the correctly tuned receiver antenna(s).
Most antennas have a finite bandwidth making them 
suitable for receivers operating only within a certain 
frequency band. When antenna distribution systems are
used, receivers should be grouped with antennas of the 
appropriate frequency band as much as possible. For the
VHF range: if the receiver frequencies span two adjacent
antenna bands, the longer (lower frequency) antennas
should be used. If the range spans all three antenna bands,
one long antenna and one short antenna should be used
(no middle length antenna). For the UHF range: receivers
should only be used with antennas of a matching range.
5) Locate diversity receiver antennas a suitable 
distance apart. For diversity reception the minimum 
separation for significant benefit is one-quarter wavelength
(about 30 cm.  for VHF and about 10 cm.  for UHF ). The
effect improves somewhat up to a separation of about one
wavelength. Diversity performance does not change 
substantially beyond this separation distance. However, in
some large area applications, overall coverage may be 
improved by further separation. In these cases one or both
antennas may be located to provide a shorter average 
distance to the transmitter(s) throughout the operating area.
6) Locate receiver antennas away from any suspected
sources of interference. These include other receiver and
transmitter antennas as well as sources mentioned earlier
such as digital equipment, AC power equipment, etc.
7) Mount receiver antennas away from metal objects.
Ideally, antennas should be in the open or else perpendicular
to metal structures such as racks, grids, metal studs, etc.
They should be at least one-quarter wavelength from any
parallel metal structure. All antennas in a multiple system
setup should be at least one-quarter wavelength apart.
8) Orient receiver antennas properly. A non-diversity 
receiver should generally have its antenna vertical.
Diversity receivers can benefit from having antennas 
1angled 45 degrees apart. Yagi and log-periodic types
should be oriented with their transverse elements vertical.
9) Use the proper antenna cable for remotely locating 
receiver antennas. A minimum length of the appropriate 
low-loss cable equipped with suitable connectors will give
the best results. Refer to the chart presented earlier.  
Because of increasing losses at higher frequencies, UHF
systems may require special cables.
10) Use an antenna distribution system when possible.
This will minimize the overall number of antennas and may
reduce interference problems with multiple receivers. For
two receivers a passive splitter may be used. For three or
more receivers active splitters are strongly recommended.
Verify proper antenna tuning as mentioned above. Antenna 
amplifiers are not usually necessary for VHF systems but
may be required for UHF systems with long cable runs.
System Setup: Batteries
Always use fresh batteries of the correct type in 
the transmitter and/or receiver. Most manufacturers 
recommend only alkaline type batteries for proper 
operation. Alkaline batteries have a much higher power 
capacity, more favorable discharge rate and longer storage
life than other types of single-use batteries such as carbonzinc. Alkaline types will operate up to 10 times longer than
so-called "heavy duty" non-alkaline cells. They are also far
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
46

less likely to cause corrosion problems if left in the unit.
Consider bulk purchase of alkaline batteries to get the
greatest economy: they have a shelf life of at least one year.  
The battery condition should be determined before 
system use and checked periodically during use, if 
possible. Most transmitters are equipped with a battery 
status indicator of some kind that will at least indicate a
go/no-go or some minimum operating time.  Some units
have a "fuel gauge" that can allow more precise indication
of remaining battery life.  A few models even have the 
capability of transmitting battery condition information to
the receiver for remote monitoring.
Rechargeable batteries may be used in wireless 
microphones with some reservations. These reservations
are dependent on the battery size and on the actual 
chemistry of the battery. The conventional rechargeable
battery uses a Ni-Cad (nickel-cadmium) cell or Ni-Mh
(nickel-metal-hydride) cell. The voltage of an individual 
Ni-Cad or Ni-Mh cell is 1.2 volts rather than the 1.5 volts
of an alkaline cell. This is a 20% lower starting voltage per
cell. For systems using AA or AAA size batteries, this lower
starting voltage may not be an issue because most 
transmitters using these battery sizes have internal voltage
regulators that can compensate. High capacity Ni-Mh 
single cell (AA or AAA) batteries are available with operating times that are comparable to single cell alkaline types.
However, the standard alkaline 9-volt battery is made
up of six cells in series, which yields an initial voltage of at
least 9 volts. Typical continuous operating time for a 9-volt
alkaline battery in a wireless microphone is about eight
hours. The least expensive "9-volt size" rechargeable also
has six cells, giving it an initial voltage of only 7.2 volts.
When combined with its lower power capacity the 
operating time may be less than 1/20 of an alkaline, only
about 15 minutes in some units. The "better" 9-volt size
rechargeable has seven cells (8.4 volts initial), but still has
significantly less power capacity than an alkaline. Operating time for these types may be as little as two hours 
compared to eight hours for an alkaline 9-volt battery 
(See Figure 4-7).
It is possible to obtain high performance 9-volt size 
Ni-Mh batteries that approach the power capacity of an 
alkaline.  These may offer up to six hours of operation.
A battery chemistry that exceeds alkaline capacity is
the lithium-ion (Li-on) or lithium-polymer (Li-polymer) type.
Not only do these batteries offer higher power density than
alkalines, they offer better charging characteristics and
longer service life than Ni-Cad or Ni-Mh types. In addition,
custom versions of the Li-on contain an integrated circuit
that monitors both the short term and long term state of the
battery. This allows extremely accurate battery voltage
measurement as well as maximum battery life. The Li-on
battery is becoming the standard rechargeable chemistry
for many professional applications.
If it is decided to use rechargeable batteries, battery
management is very important. For systems in daily service
a minimum of two batteries per unit is recommended due
to the charging time: one charging, and one in use.  In 
addition, Ni-Cad batteries must periodically be completely
cycled to get maximum service life and avoid developing
a short discharge "memory effect."  Generally, Ni-Mh and 
Li-on types do not exhibit memory effect. However, for
maximum performance from any rechargeable battery it is
necessary to use a high-quality charger that is designed
for the specific battery type.  Improper charging can impair
or even damage rechargeable batteries prematurely.
Ultimately, the long-term potential savings in battery
cost must be weighed against the expected operating time,
initial investment and ongoing maintenance requirements
for rechargeable batteries.
System Checkout and Operation
Good practice with any wireless microphone system
calls for a checkout of the system ahead of performance
time. As suggested in the squelch adjustment section this
should be done with all associated production equipment
also on. This may reveal potential problems that are not
apparent in a wireless-system-only test.
It should be noted in Step 3 (on pg. 42) that certain 
combinations of active transmitters and receivers might 
indicate pickup of an individual transmitter by more than
one receiver. However, in Step 7 (on pg. 42), when all
transmitters are active, each should be picked up by just
its intended receiver. Unless there is audible interference
when all transmitters are on this should not pose a problem, since a receiver should not normally be turned up
when its own transmitter is not active. Once the wireless
microphone systems have passed this checkout there are
a few recommendations to achieve successful operation
during the performance:
Figure 4-7: alkaline vs. rechargeable batteries
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
47

WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Computer-Controlled Wireless Systems
It was noted in the digital wireless selection that digital
control circuits are now common in wireless systems, 
particularly frequency-agile designs. Various transmitter
and receiver functions are handled by embedded microprocessors. Display information is also digitally generated.
One result of these internal technologies is the possibility of
external monitoring and control of wireless systems.
Although this goal could be achieved with proprietary 
controls and displays, the most common wireless system 
interface device is the personal computer. By using such a
universal platform it is possible to monitor and control largescale wireless installations from both local and remote points.
Hookup is usually through either USB or Ethernet connections.
Typical monitor capabilities include battery condition,
RF signal strength, audio level and diversity status. Typical
receiver control functions include frequency selection,
squelch level set, and alphanumeric channel naming. 
In addition, some systems can automate the selection of 
appropriate operating frequencies without prior knowledge
of the RF environment.
Such systems have a set-up mode during which the 
receiver functions as an automatic radio scanner to find open
channels. This scan-mode can be under the control of an 
onboard microprocessor in an individual receiver or externally
controlled by a computer. The receiver can also be made to
function as a simple RF spectrum analyzer for interference
problems or as an RF level recorder for uncovering possible 
antenna problems in a pre-show walk-through.
Finally, computer data management capability permits 
creating and recalling “scenes” or setups for touring, rentals,
and other temporary applications, as well as logging of 
wireless system performance. All of this information can be
reviewed as
needed for 
troubleshooting 
or maintenance.
Presently, 
computer control
can assist in setup
and operation of
even moderatesized wireless rigs
and is the only
practical way of 
integrating very
large wireless 
installations.
"Intelligent" Wireless Systems
An extension of wireless system control is the ability to
communicate with transmitters through a secondary radio
link.  These "back-channel" techniques typically operate in
the 2.4 GHz range in a manner that is somewhat similar to
Wi-Fi as a two-way data link. This gives the user the ability
to control the transmitter remotely.  Audio gain, transmitter
power, and even transmit frequency can be adjusted at a
distance either from an associated receiver or other 
outboard control device such as a computer.  
In addition, receivers have been developed that can recognize an interfering signal. When combined with remote control of transmitters, it is now possible for such a receiver to
automatically retune itself and the associated transmitter to a
clear frequency with almost no interruption of the audio signal.
When combined with appropriate equipment, such a
system can find and set all channels to a compatible 
frequency set and then continue to monitor and change 
frequencies as needed during an event to maintain continuous operation even in very dynamic RF environments.  
Pre-Show Checkout:
1) Verify good batteries in all transmitters.
2) Turn on all receivers (without transmitters) and all antenna distribution
equipment. All receivers should show little or no RF activity.  
3) Turn on individual transmitters one at a time to verify activation of
proper receiver. Transmitters should all be at a comparable distance 
(at least 5 meters) from receiving antennas. Off-channel receivers
should show little or no RF activity.
4) Turn on all transmitters (with receivers) to verify activation of all receivers. Transmitters should all be at a comparable distance (at least 5
meters) from receiving antennas and at least 1 meter from each other.
5) Perform a stationary listening test with each individual system one at 
a time to verify proper audio level settings.
6) Perform a listening test around the performance area with each 
individual system one at a time to verify no dropouts.
7) Perform a listening test around the performance area with each 
individual system while all systems are on to verify no audible 
interference or dropouts.
Show Operation:
1) Again, verify good batteries in all transmitters.
2) Receivers should be muted until transmitters are on.
3) Do not activate unneeded transmitters or their associated receivers.
4) Once the system is on, use the "mute" or "microphone" switch to turn
off the audio if necessary, not power switch. 
(This is not a concern for tone-key squelch systems.)
5) Do not bring up the sound system audio level for any receiver that does
not have an active transmitter.
6) Maintain line-of-sight from transmitter antennas to receiver antennas.
7) Maintain transmitter-to-receiver antenna distance of at least 5 meters.
8) Maintain transmitter-to-transmitter distance of at least 1 meter 
if possible.
9) Operate transmitters in the same general performance area.
10) At the end of the event mute receiver outputs before turning off 
transmitters.
Figure 4-8: Shure Axient Wireless System
48

49
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Troubleshooting WirelessMicrophone Systems
Even when wireless microphone systems appear to be
properly selected and set up, problems may arise in actual
use.  While it is not practical here to offer comprehensive
solutions for all possible situations some general guidelines
are suggested.
Though problems with wireless microphone systems 
eventually show up as audible effects these effects can be
symptoms of audio and/or radio problems. The object of 
troubleshooting in either situation is first to identify the source
of the problem and second to reduce or eliminate the problem.
The following abbreviations are used in these charts:  
AF-audio frequency, RF-radio frequency, RFI-radio 
frequency interference, TX-transmitter, RCV-receiver
A common symptom in multiple system operation 
is apparent activation of two receivers by a single 
transmitter. This can be due to one of several causes: 
operating frequencies the same or too close, crystal 
harmonics, transmitter at the image frequency of 
the second receiver, IM with an unknown source, etc. 
If activating the second transmitter results in proper 
operation of both systems this effect can usually be 
ignored. Recommended operating procedure is to turn
up a receiver only when its transmitter is active. If it is 
desired to allow open receivers without transmitters, 
readjusting the squelch settings may suffice. Otherwise
the operating frequencies may have to be changed.
Troubleshooting Guide
Conditions:  TX on, RCV on, single system
Symptom
TX - RCV
Possible cause
Action
Distance
No AF signal and no RF signal 
any
low TX battery voltage
replace battery
No AF signal and no RF signal
any
TX and RCV tuned to 
retune one or both units
different frequencies
No AF signal and no RF signal
average
multipath dropout
use diversity RCV or reposition TX
and/or RCV
No AF signal and no RF signal
long
out of range
move TX closer to RCV
No AF signal but normal RF signal
any
TX muted
un-mute TX
No AF signal but normal RF signal
any
microphone or other input source
check input source
Distortion with no AF peak indication
any
low TX battery voltage
replace battery
Distortion with AF peak indication
any
excessive TX input level 
decrease source level or TX input level
Distortion with AF peak indication in
any
excessive RCV output level
decrease RCV output level
subsequent equipment
Noise with low AF signal and normal RF signal
any
insufficient TX input level
increase source level or TX input level
Noise with low AF signal and normal RF signal
any
strong RFI
identify source and eliminate, or change 
frequency of wireless microphone system
Noise with normal AF signal and low RF signal
average
moderate RFI 
increase squelch setting until RCV mutes 
Noise with normal AF and RF signals 
any
very strong RFI
identify source and eliminate, or change 
frequency of wireless microphone system
Intermittent AF signal and low RF signal
long
out of range
move TX closer to RCV
Intermittent AF signal and low RF signal
long
insufficient antenna gain
use higher gain antenna
Intermittent AF signal and low RF signal
long
excessive antenna cable loss
use low loss cable and/or less cable
Intermittent AF and RF signals
average
multipath interference
use diversity RCV or reposition TX 
and/or RCV
Intermittent AF and RF signals
average
obstructions in signal path
remove obstructions or reposition TX 
and/or RCV
Intermittent AF and RF signals
average
squelch set too high
decrease squelch setting
Intermittent AF and RF signals
average
very strong RFI
identify source and eliminate, or change 
frequency of wireless microphone system
When multiple systems are in use some additional problems can occur due to interaction between the systems. Turning individual systems on and off and trying 
systems in different combinations can help to pinpoint the cause.  However, this can become much more difficult as the number of systems increases.
Following are some multiple system troubleshooting suggestions for symptoms observed when all systems are active.
Conditions:  TX on, RCV on, multiple systems
Symptom
Distance
Possible cause
Action
Distortion on two (or more) systems with no
any
units on same frequency
change frequencies
AF peak indication
Distortion on one (or more) systems with no
TX-TX short
TX + TX intermod
change frequencies
AF peak indication
Distortion on one (or more) systems with no
TX-TX short
TX + TX intermod
increase TX to TX distance
AF peak indication
TX-RCV short
TX + TX + RCV intermod
change frequencies
Distortion on one (or more) systems with no
TX-RCV short
TX + TX + RCV intermod
increase TX to RCV distance
AF peak indication

CHAPTER FIVE
APPLICATION NOTES
Following are some suggestions on wireless microphone
system selection and use for some specific applications. 
Each section gives typical choices and setup for microphones,
transmitters and receivers as well as a few operating tips.
Presenters
The most common wireless
choice for presenters has been
the lavaliere/bodypack system,
which allows hands-free use 
for a single speaking voice. 
However, the traditional lavaliere
microphone is often being 
replaced by a small headworn
microphone because of its much
better acoustic performance. 
In either case, the microphone is connected to a bodypack
transmitter and the combination is worn by the presenter.
The receiver is located in a fixed position.
The bodypack transmitter is generally worn at the
waistband or belt.  It should be located so that the antenna
can be freely extended and so that the controls can be
reached easily. Transmitter gain should be adjusted to 
provide suitable level for the particular presenter.
The receiver should be located so that its antennas are
line of sight to the transmitter and at a suitable distance,
preferably at least 5 meters. Once the receiver is connected
to the sound system the output level and squelch should be
adjusted according to the previous recommendations.
The most important factor in achieving good sound
quality and adequate gain-before-feedback with a lavaliere
system is microphone choice and placement. A high 
quality microphone placed as close as practical to 
the wearers’ mouth is the best starting point. An 
omnidirectional lavaliere microphone should be attached to
the presenter on a tie, lapel or other location within 
8-10 inches of the mouth for best pickup. 
The headworn microphone has a significant advantage
because of its much closer placement to the mouth. 
Compared to a lavaliere microphone at 8 inches from the
mouth, a headworn type placed within one inch of the
mouth will have 18dB better gain-before-feedback. In 
addition, because the microphone is always at the same 
distance from the mouth, there is no volume change or tonal
change as the presenter’s head moves in any direction. 
In situations of limited gain-before-feedback or high ambient noise levels a unidirectional microphone may be used.
This type should be located like the omnidirectional type but
it must also be aimed at the presenter’s mouth.  The user
should be aware that unidirectional types are much more
sensitive to wind noise and breath blasts (k’s, t’s, d’s, etc.) as
well as noise from clothing rubbing against the microphone
or cable. Unidirectional microphones should always be used
with a windscreen and mounted in a way to reduce direct
mechanical contact with clothing or jewelry.  Again, the
headworn type has an advantage because the microphone
itself is not in contact with clothing or other articles. 
Finally, it should be noted that the unidirectional gainbefore-feedback improvement is typically only 6-8dB. Thus,
an omnidirectional headworn microphone will still have at
least a 11-12dB advantage in gain-before-feedback over a
unidirectional lavaliere type. This is sufficient to allow the use
of omnidirectional headworn microphones in all but the 
most severe feedback environments. A unidirectional 
headworn microphone can perform nearly identically to a
unidirectional handheld type and substantially better than
any lavaliere type in this case.
Musical Instruments
The most appropriate
choice for an instrument 
wireless application is a
bodypack system, which 
will accept the audio signal 
from various instrument
sources. The receiver
can be a diversity design
for highest performance
or 
non-diversity 
for 
economy applications
and is located in a 
fixed position.
The transmitter can
often be attached to the instrument itself or to the instrument
strap. In any case it should be located to avoid interfering with
the player but with its controls accessible. Instrument sources
include electric guitars and basses as well as acoustic instruments such as saxophones and trumpets. Electric sources can
usually connect directly to a transmitter while acoustic sources
require a microphone or other transducer.
Receivers for instrument systems are connected to an
instrument amplifier for electric guitars and basses or to a
mixer input for acoustic instruments, which are not 
otherwise amplified. Be aware of the potential for 
interference from digital effects processors in the vicinity
of the amplifier or at the mixer position. Connections should
be well-shielded and secure. Again the usual distance and
line-of-sight considerations apply.
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
50

The most important factor in the performance of an
instrument system is the interface between the instrument and
the transmitter. The signals from electric instruments fitted with
magnetic pickups are generally comparable to microphone
signals, though the levels and impedances may be somewhat
higher. Other transducers such as piezo-electric types 
have output signals that also are similar to microphone 
signals but again may have higher levels and substantially
higher impedances. With any of these sources care should
be taken to insure that there is compatibility with the transmitter
input in regard to level, impedance and connector type.
Occasionally it is found that certain wireless 
microphone systems do not initially work well with certain
instruments. Symptoms may include poor frequency 
response, distortion or noise. In most cases this can be
traced to an impedance or level mismatch between the
two. Frequency response changes are most often due to
impedance problems. Make sure that the transmitter has
sufficiently high input impedance. Distortion is usually due
to excessive input level to the transmitter. Instruments with
active circuitry (battery powered preamps) often have very
high output levels which may need to be attenuated for
some transmitters. They may also suffer from RFI caused
by the wireless microphone system. This may reduced by
the addition of RF filters in the instrument.
A common type of noise that is heard in wireless 
microphone systems is often called modulation noise. This is
a low-level hiss, which accompanies the actual instrument
sound. Though it is usually masked by the instrument sound
certain factors may make it more pronounced. These include
low audio signal levels, low RF signal levels and high RF noise
levels. Modulation noise can be most noticeable when the
wireless microphone system is connected to a high gain 
instrument amplifier with boosted high frequencies and 
distortion circuits engaged. The apparent level of modulation
noise can be reduced by setting the transmitter gain as high as
possible (without causing distortion), maintaining adequate 
RF signal level and avoiding sources of RF noise.
Some electric guitars and basses used with wireless
microphone systems may also exhibit intermittent noise
when their control pots are moved to or from the endpoints
of their rotation (full-on or full-off). This is due to metal-tometal contact, which occurs at these points in certain 
potentiometer designs. A different type of pot may need to
be substituted.  
Microphones for acoustic instruments may be omnior unidirectional and are usually condenser types. Microphone selection and placement for acoustic instruments
is a subjective process that may involve a certain amount
of trial and error. See the references in the bibliography 
for suggestions.  
It is advised to consult the manufacturer of the wireless
equipment and/or the manufacturer(s) of the instruments,
microphones and transducers if problems persist. They may
have details of suggested modifications for one or both units.
One wireless benefit of interest to guitar players is the
elimination of the potential shock hazard created between a
wired electric guitar and a wired microphone. Once the
hardwire connection between either the guitar and amplifier
or between the microphone and the PA system is removed
the polarity of the guitar amp is of no consequence.
Vocalists
The usual choice for
vocalists is a handheld
wireless 
microphone 
system for close pickup 
of the singing voice. 
It consists of a suitable 
vocal 
microphone 
element attached to 
a handheld transmitter 
used with a fixed 
receiver.
The microphone/transmitter may be handheld 
or mounted on a microphone stand. Microphone 
technique is essentially the same as for a wired 
microphone: close placement gives the most gain-beforefeedback, the least ambient noise pickup and the most
proximity effect. An accessory pop filter may be used if
wind or breath blast is a problem. If the transmitter is
equipped with an external antenna avoid placing the hand
around it. If the transmitter has externally accessible 
controls it may be useful to conceal them with a sleeve or
tape to avoid accidental switching during a performance.
Some transmitters can be set to lock out the controls. 
Battery condition should be checked prior to this if the 
indicator will be covered. Transmitter gain should be 
adjusted for the particular vocalist at performance levels.
A popular option for vocalists who require hands-free
operation is the unidirectional headworn microphone.  
It can have gain-before-feedback performance equivalent
to a handheld and similar sound quality as well. The only
operational difference is that the vocalist cannot “work” the
microphone by changing its distance from the mouth.
Thus, vocal dynamics need to be adjusted with the singer’s
vocal technique rather than by microphone technique.
The receiver should be located at a suitable distance
and in line of sight to the transmitter. Since this is often at
the mixer position, check for possible interference from
nearby digital signal processors. Again antenna and audio
connections should be well-shielded and secure.
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
51

The primary considerations for sound quality in a 
hand-held wireless microphone system is the microphone
element and its proper integration with the transmitter. The
choice of element for a wireless microphone system would
be made according to the same criteria as for a wired 
microphone. Ideally the wireless version of a microphone
will sound identical to the wired version. Ultimately this is
up to the manufacturer of the wireless microphone system.
For this reason it is highly recommended to compare the 
performance of the proposed wireless microphone 
system to its wired counterpart to make sure that any 
differences in sound quality or directionality are minimal.
Aerobic/Dance Instruction
Aerobic and dance applications
most often require bodypack 
wireless microphone systems to
allow hands-free use by the 
instructor. The microphone is
most often a headworn type, with
a unidirectional element. This will
give the best results for feedback
control and overall sound quality.
A lavaliere microphone may be used if gain-before-feedback
is not a problem but it will not have the same sound quality
as a headworn type. The receiver may be diversity or 
non-diversity depending on the performance level required
and is located in a fixed position.
The transmitter is worn at the waist and must be 
securely attached since the user is generally quite active.
The antenna should be freely extended and the controls
accessibly located. Gain should be adjusted for the 
individual under actual use conditions.
The receiver should be located with the usual regard to
distance and line of sight. In addition it should be out of
the way of moving bodies and feet. Since these systems
are often set up and taken down the connections should
be regularly checked.
The primary criterion for aerobic/dance systems is 
reliability under extremely active conditions. These 
conditions include vibration, impact, heat, humidity and 
various bodily fluids! The basic system must certainly be
durable but there are some additional steps that can be
taken to improve long-term reliability. An accessory belt or
pouch made of neoprene can protect the transmitter from
mechanical damage as well as perspiration. It also provides
a pad between the wearer and the transmitter to improve
comfort and allows the transmitter to be easily repositioned
if the instructor is doing floor exercises. etc. A design that
covers the controls and/or connectors will further resist 
corrosion damage at these points of entry.
Microphone cable life can be prolonged by routing the
cable to avoid extreme flexing or pull. Allow slack at the
headband and at the point of entry to the transmitter. A
side entry design provides more strain relief and allows for
a drip loop in the cable to prevent perspiration from flowing
down the cable into the connector. If an adjustable 
headband is used it should be adjusted only as often as
necessary to maintain adequate stability.
The microphone element can be somewhat protected by
using a foam windscreen. Periodically remove the windscreen,
sponge it in warm soapy water, rinse and let dry. Replace 
when it shows signs of wear. However, even with these 
precautions the microphone and cable assembly in such a
system should probably be considered a consumable item.
Theater
Theatrical applications also generally call for lavaliere/
bodypack wireless microphone systems. The microphone
and transmitter are worn by the performer while the 
receiver is in a fixed location. Theater combines aspects of
presenter, vocalist, and aerobic/dance applications with
additional unique requirements.
In current theater practice the
lavaliere microphone is often 
concealed somewhere on the
head of the performer: just in front
of the ear, on the forehead, in the
hair or beard, etc. In some cases it
is concealed in some part of the
costume such as a hat or high 
collar. The intent is always to get the microphone as close to the
performer’s mouth as possible without being visible. The close
placement maximizes gain-before feedback and minimizes
noise and acoustic interference. Miniature omnidirectional
types are used almost exclusively, but they must be of high
quality for both speech and singing. Avoid obstructing the ports
on microphones with makeup or adhesives.
Headworn microphones have become much more
common in theatrical applications, particularly for highsound-level musical theater. Again, the benefits of very high
gain-before-feedback, high signal-to-noise ratio, and 
consistent microphone-to-mouth distance make the 
headworn type an excellent choice in this setting. 
Transmitters are also concealed in or under costumes
and are often subject to an even more severe environment
than the aerobic/dance situation. Special packs and bindings are available to attach the transmitter to various parts
of the body. Latex covers are sometimes used to protect
transmitters from sweat. Routing microphone cables and
antennas and still allowing quick costume changes 
presents a serious challenge. Normal wear and tear on 
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
52

cables and connectors will take a rapid toll on anything but
the most reliable microphones and transmitters.
Receivers for theatrical applications are not unique but
they must be of high quality to allow multiple system use without interference. It is not unusual to use as many as 30 
simultaneous wireless microphone systems in a professional
musical theater production. This number can only be handled
with systems operating in the UHF range. 10 to 12 systems
is the practical limit at VHF frequencies. In addition, separate
antennas and antenna distribution systems are necessary for
any installation involving a large number of systems.
Though small-scale theater applications can be done with
a moderate investment in planning and equipment, largescale productions usually require professional coordination of
wireless microphone systems to achieve successful results.
This becomes an absolute necessity for a touring production.
Worship
Worship services may include
presenter, vocalist and instrument
applications. While wireless vocal
and instrument use is essentially
the same as outlined in the 
preceding sections, the presenter
function may be somewhat 
different. Microphone, transmitter
and receiver selection are as before but placement of the
components may require extra consideration.
In particular, proper location of the lavaliere microphone
and/or transmitter may pose problems because of robes or
vestments. It is still necessary to position the microphone as
close as practical the user’s mouth for best results. Different
methods of attachment may be necessary. Access to transmitter controls can also be problematic. Use of accessory
microphone mute switches similar to those worn by sports
referees can be the answer. Though an omnidirectional type
microphone is easier to use, a unidirectional model may be
chosen to allow more gain-before-feedback. In this case pop
sensitivity and mechanical noise should be taken into 
account. Again it is very important to adjust the transmitter
level for the individuals’ voice under actual conditions.
Note that headworn microphones are becoming more
acceptable for worship applications. They provide the 
highest gain-before-feedback in a hands-free type. 
Because most worship services involve both wired
lectern microphones and wireless lavaliere microphones it
often happens that the person wearing the wireless is also
speaking at the lectern. If the voice is picked up by both 
microphones an acoustic phenomenon known as "comb 
filtering" occurs which creates a hollow, unnatural sound.
The solution is to turn down one of the two microphones
whenever they are within one or two feet of each other. 
In most cases it will be less noticeable to turn down the
lectern microphone when the wireless wearer approaches it.
Proper frequency selection is necessary for any worship
application. Since a fixed location is the norm, unused TV
channel frequencies are the best recommendation, not
"traveling" frequencies. The simultaneous use of other 
wireless microphone systems by vocalists and musicians
during the service must be considered as well. In addition,
wireless microphone systems at other churches or facilities
within 1000 feet of the site should be included in any 
program for frequency coordination.
Finally, receivers should be located and adjusted 
according to the suggestions made earlier. Even with proper
squelch settings, though, it is very strongly recommended to
turn off or turn down the outputs of any receivers that do
not have an active transmitter. This will avoid noise from 
random RF interference being heard in the sound system.
Bingo
Wireless microphones are common in large-scale 
bingo halls. Though the caller is typically in a fixed 
location and uses a hardwired microphone, the checkers
must be able to move about the hall in order to verify the
cards. Handheld systems are the usual choice but 
bodypack systems with either headworn or lavaliere 
microphones are also used. Receivers are in fixed locations.
Selection and operation of wireless for this application is
straightforward though often strongly influenced by budget. In
particular, it is often requested that a single receiver be used
for multiple transmitters on the same frequency since only
a single checker need be on the air at any one time. While
this is technically possible it becomes difficult in practice for
two reasons: failure to turn off transmitters when not needed
and noise that occurs when transmitters are switched on
and off. As indicated previously, simultaneous operation of
more than one transmitter on the same frequency creates
severe interference. In addition, some amount of switching
noise is inevitable except in tone-key squelch systems.
Transmitters should be muted when not being used,
but power should remain on to eliminate possibility of noise.
If it is desired to turn the checker wireless transmitters off
during the event, make sure that squelch levels are 
adjusted properly. Ideally, the corresponding receiver(s)
should be turned down until needed. Tone-key squelch
systems are useful in this application to allow transmitters
to be turned on and off without noise.
Receivers and antennas should be located properly for
coverage of the intended area. The usual suggestions 
concerning frequency selection apply.  In particular, unused
TV channel frequencies are recommended since bingo 
systems are generally in fixed locations.  
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
53

Film/Videography
Film and videography 
applications usually call 
for 
lavaliere/bodypack
wireless microphone systems to minimize the
visibility of the microphone. 
Handheld transmitters may
also be used when visual 
appearance is not an issue. 
However, the receivers may
be either fixed or portable.
A common choice is a camera-mounted receiver used 
with a camcorder. Microphone/transmitter selection and 
placement are as outlined in other sections. Directional 
microphones are useful to control ambient noise. 
Placement can be consistent with visual requirements but 
should be positioned as close as practical to the sound 
source. The overall audio quality is largely determined by 
microphone selection and placement.
An important area in the use of wireless microphone
systems with video and film equipment is the electrical 
interface between them. The interface is specified in terms
of level, impedance, configuration (balanced/unbalanced)
and connector. While the output characteristics of wireless
receivers are well specified and fairly standard, the audio
input characteristics of video equipment are often 
unspecified and unique. This is especially true for 
consumer video camcorders.  Professional video units are
normally designed with standard professional audio inputs.
Most camcorders that have a built-in microphone also
have an input jack for an external microphone. This is 
usually a 1/8" mini phone jack. If the wireless receiver is
equipped with a microphone-level 1/4" phone jack output
a simple adapter cable will generally suffice. If the receiver
only has an XLR-type output some additional concerns
arise. An adapter cable or transformer can be used as 
described in the receiver setup section above.
Stereo camcorders often use an 1/8" stereo (tip-ringsleeve) external microphone jack. To deliver a monophonic
wireless signal to both the left and right audio channels a
mono-to-stereo adapter must be inserted at the input jack.
Some camera-mount receivers include a special output
cable designed to work in either mono or stereo inputs.
Certain camcorder microphone inputs also supply a DC
bias voltage for condenser microphones. In this case a 
transformer or blocking capacitor may be required to isolate
the output of the wireless receiver from the DC. Consult the 
camcorder literature or manufacturer for details.
Camcorders that do not have manual audio level 
controls are always equipped with an automatic gain control
(AGC).  Its function is to maintain a constant audio recording
level by increasing the gain for weak signals and decreasing
the gain for strong signals. This circuit is generally not 
defeatable. When using the built-in microphone most direct
sound sources are at a significant distance. At the 
microphone the overall variation between direct sound level
and background sound level is not very large.
Close-talked microphones, either handheld or lavaliere,
present a much stronger signal relative to the background
sound level. With these devices the AGC will operate at
high gain when only background sound is present and will
quickly reduce gain when a strong close-talk signal occurs.
This will result in audible "pumping" of the background
noise level. The same effect is typically heard in live sports
broadcasts: the crowd noise is quickly suppressed when
the announcer speaks and slowly returns when the 
announcer is silent. Unfortunately, if the AGC is not 
defeatable there is no convenient way to eliminate this 
effect. Operating the wireless microphone system at very
low levels can force the AGC to operate at full gain but this
will result in noisy audio tracks.
Frequency selection for film/videography should be
done according to the guidelines already presented.  One
additional source of potential interference is the video
equipment itself since it contains digital and RF circuitry.
Listen for audible effects from both the transmitter and
from the receiver when they are used close to the camera
and/or video recorders.
Broadcast
Broadcast applications
may require handheld, 
plug-on and/or bodypack
wireless microphone systems. To interview random
subjects most field reporters and roving talk show
hosts prefer a handheld or
plug-on transmitter for maximum mobility and control. Bodypack systems are used to
pick up a single talent when a handheld type would be 
cumbersome. Receivers may be in a fixed location for 
studio use or may be portable for field use.
Omnidirectional microphones are the preferred choice
for situations where ambient noise is not excessive.  
This allows more flexibility in placement and orientation as
well as reduced sensitivity to wind and handling noise.
When ambient noise is a factor or in a setup where 
feedback is a possibility a unidirectional microphone may
be necessary. Microphones with good sound quality 
and durability are a must.
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
54

Lavaliere microphones will require a bodypack 
transmitter. If a desired handheld microphone model is
available in a wireless version it can be used directly. Since
most handheld transmitters use unidirectional microphone
elements a plug-on transmitter may be necessary for use
with handheld omnidirectional microphones or other wired
hand-held models.
Even for portable or camera-mount use a diversity 
receiver is standard choice for professional broadcast 
applications. Antenna location should be well planned, 
especially when used in a studio environment with 
lighting grids and other large metal structures. Receivers
should be located away from lighting controllers, digital
audio equipment and video equipment that may produce 
interference. Balanced audio lines are also standard 
procedure.
Receivers used in remote trucks face interference not
only from nearby audio and video equipment but they may
also be subject to interference from two-way radio systems
and remote-to-studio transmitters operating on VHF or
UHF frequencies. Two-way transceivers should not be 
operated close to wireless transmitters or receivers. The
wireless microphone system receivers should also be 
located well away from remote link transmitters. In addition, both the wireless microphone system antennas and
the remote link antennas should be properly installed for 
minimum interference with each other.
Frequency selection for broadcast involves the same 
considerations as in other applications for studio use. In
ENG (Electronic News Gathering) or EFP (Electronic Field 
Production) situations the additional factors of nearby 
remote transmitters and the possibility of wireless 
microphone systems in use by other broadcast crews must
be taken into account. In a local area it is sometimes possible to coordinate frequencies between different stations
ahead of time to reduce the likelihood of frequency conflict
at a news site.  Specifying high quality frequency-agile wireless equipment will further minimize interference problems.
Point-to-Point Wireless
Introduction
Often it is desirable (or even mandatory) to send an
audio signal from one fixed location to another fixed 
location without wires. This is termed "point-to-point" 
wireless. In some cases this may involve a single transmit location and multiple receive locations, referred to as 
"point-to-multi-point" wireless. Possible applications include
remote speaker/amplifier locations, remote recording/
broadcast operations, and one-way communication links. 
Potentially this could be accomplished either by optical
transmission or by radio frequency transmission.
Optical methods are inherently limited to line-of-sight
conditions. The use of conventional (non-directional) 
infrared transmission is limited by ambient light levels 
vs. practical infrared power levels. Modulated laser 
transmission (highly directional) is another optical 
possibility but available systems are primarily geared to
high-speed data/video transmission and are not widely (or
affordably) distributed.
Low-power radio transmission systems, on the other
hand, are both widely available and relatively affordable.
For radio signals, line-of-sight conditions are desirable but
they are not strictly required. In addition, point-tomulti-point is more easily accomplished with a single radio
transmitter. 
Most radio communication products such as wireless
intercoms, two-way radios, and mobile phones are 
unsuitable due to lack of audio fidelity. However, two 
common high-fidelity radio products that can be used in a
point-to-point application are the wireless microphone 
system and the wireless in-ear monitor system. Each of
these has slightly different concerns/advantages in 
performance and in setup.
Using wireless microphones for point-to-point
A bodypack wireless system can fulfill the 
requirements above with two modifications. (See Figure
5-1.) First, though many receivers have line level outputs,
few transmitters are capable of accepting a line level
input signal. This can be accomplished by using an external pad or attenuator at the transmitter input. Second,
though most receivers run on AC power, transmitters are 
battery-only devices.  Using a suitable external DC power
supply can provide the necessary AC capability for 
the transmitter.
Once the input signal is sufficiently attenuated and
power is provided, the bodypack transmitter should be 
located to provide the best line-of-sight to the receiver.  This
usually involves securing the pack to a pole or some other
elevated structure. If wet weather is a factor, the transmitter
can be protected by a "ziplock" bag or other covering.  
At the receiver, no modification is usually required
since it is AC powered and has a line level output.  
General requirements for 
point-to-point wireless include:
• High fidelity audio
• Line level in and line level out
• AC-power capability for both transmitter and receiver
• "Sufficient" transmission distance
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
55

Using wireless in-ear monitors for point-to-point
A wireless in-ear monitor system (IEM) can also be
used as a point-to-point system with only one modification
at the receiver. At the transmitter, no modification is 
usually required since it is AC powered and can accept line
level signals directly. (See Figure 5-2.)
The modification to the receiver is again for AC power.
Many IEM receivers use 9-volt batteries and thus can use
a procedure similar to that for the 9-volt transmitters above.
The only other accommodation necessary at the 
receiver is adapting the stereo (TRS) mini-phone jack 
output to connect to the destination audio system. This is
effectively an unbalanced, -10dBv signal, suitable for 
most line level input devices. It is recommended that 
any receiver limiter be switched off for point-to-point 
applications in order to obtain the maximum drive level.
Once power and audio connections are made, the IEM
receiver should be secured to an elevated location to allow
best line of sight to the IEM transmitter. Again, weather 
protection for the receiver can be provided by a ziplock bag
or similar covering.
A significant difference between IEM and wireless 
microphones for this application is that the stereo IEM can
transmit two audio channels (multiplexed) per radio 
frequency while the wireless microphone system can
transmit only one audio channel per radio frequency. 
If stereo transmission is required IEM is more cost- and
spectrum-efficient.
Figure 5-1: point-to-point using a wireless microphone system
Figure 5-2: point-to-point using an IEM system (with directional antennas for maximum range)
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
56

Combining in-ear monitors with wireless 
microphones for point-to-point
It is sometimes possible to use an IEM transmitter in
conjunction with a wireless microphone receiver to create
a point-to-point system that is already set up at each end
for line-level audio signals and AC power. The principle 
requirements are that the operating frequencies match and
that the audio companding schemes are compatible. Of
course only mono audio signals may be transmitted due to
the mono nature of the wireless microphone receiver.  
The one modification that may be needed is to defeat
the squelch circuit of the wireless microphone receiver.
Certain IEM transmitters can now be used with compatible
wireless microphone receivers without defeating tone-key
squelch in the receiver.  This is accomplished by a menu
setting in the IEM transmitter which matches its tone-key
frequency to that of the receiver.
Finally, it may be possible to use a wireless microphone
transmitter with an IEM receiver to create an entirely 
battery-powered point-to-point system. Again, the radio 
frequencies and companding schemes must match.
However, it is probably more efficient to use a wireless 
microphone with a matching camera-mount type receiver
if a completely battery-powered system is the goal.
Antennas
The antennas supplied with most wireless products 
are omnidirectional. These are suitable for both point-topoint and point-to-multi-point applications. If additional 
transmission range is required it may be possible to 
use directional receiving and/or transmitting antenna(s). 
Note that although diversity receivers are always preferred
it may not be necessary (or practical) to use directional 
antennas on both antenna inputs for point-to-point. Since
the transmitter and receiver locations are assumed to 
be fixed in this application, multipath variations should be
minimal once the equipment is set up.
Maximum range of point-to-point wireless 
The practical range for most of these systems in pointto-point applications is comparable to their published range
in normal usage. For standard wireless systems this ranges
from about 150 ft. to 800 ft. depending on various 
conditions. Directional antennas may boost these ranges
by 50%. Good line of sight and the normal precautions for
frequency selection are assumed.
The maximum range system employs an IEM 
transmitter with either an IEM receiver or a suitable wireless microphone receiver. The range advantage of these 
systems is due to two factors: first, the transmitter power is
higher, up to 100mW. This is at least twice the power of
most wireless microphone systems. Second, since both
the transmitter and the receiver may have detachable 
antennas, it is possible to use a directional antenna on both
the transmitter and the receiver.
In operation, the receiving and transmitting antennas
should be pointed toward each other and oriented 
vertically. Elevation for best line of sight will further improve
range. Such a system may be capable of stereo transmission
up to 2500 ft and mono operation up to 3500 ft.
If greater distances are required, it can be accomplished
by using an additional system as "repeater." That is, at the 
location of the first receiver a second transmitter is set up to
rebroadcast the signal to a more distant second receiver.  
Of course, each of these additional systems has to be on a
different compatible frequency. The practical limit for a 
repeater system using standard wireless equipment is about
3 "hops" due to increased noise and distortion.
Summary
It is possible to employ wireless systems for pointto-point applications in several ways. Both wireless 
microphone systems and IEM systems can be used, each
with different  adaptations. The modifications are primarily
for AC powering of battery powered devices and for 
matching audio signal levels. Special connectors and/or
adapters may also be necessary in some cases.
For moderate distance, single channel applications
may use wireless microphone systems for good results.  
Multi-channel, especially stereo, transmission may benefit
from the IEM approach. Longer distance uses will require
directional antennas for wireless microphone receivers or
for IEM transmitters. Maximum range applications can be
handled by the dual directional antenna IEM setup or by
using multiple systems in a repeater configuration.
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
57

Conclusion
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
58
To the extent that wireless audio technology is a work in progress, this presentation
is also a work in progress. As new radio technologies develop, new applications
will arise to take advantage of them. At the same time, new spectrum rules and 
allocations will likely challenge the capability of wireless equipment suppliers and
users to provide successful solutions for those applications.
Implementing successful solutions will rely not just on the programmed 
"intelligence" built into the equipment but also on the dynamic intelligence of the
people specifying and using the equipment. That intelligence comes both from
study of the principles underlying the technology and from experience gained by
using the technology in real-world situations.
It is hoped that the material presented in this publication will serve as a useful 
reference on the technical principles of wireless audio transmission, as well as a
practical guide to using those principles in a wide variety of applications.

Appendix A
Reference Information
Calculation of Intermodulation Products
The simplest IM products that can occur between any
two operating frequencies (f1 and f2) are the sum of the
two frequencies and the difference between the two 
frequencies:  
f1 + f2
(sum)
f1 - f2
(difference)
If we choose f1 = 200 MHz and f2 = 195 MHz, then:  
f1 + f2 = 200 + 195 = 395 MHz (sum)
f1 - f2 = 200 - 195 = 5 MHz (difference)
These IM products are sufficiently far away from the
original frequencies that they will generally not cause 
problems to a third wireless microphone system in the 
original frequency band.  
However, as mentioned earlier, other products of 
non-linear circuits are multiples of the original frequency.
That is, application of a single frequency to a non-linear
circuit will produce additional products that are double,
triple, quadruple, etc. the original frequency. Fortunately,
the strength of these products decreases rapidly as the
order (multiplication factor) increases. The practical result
is that only the products at two times and three times the
original frequency are significant. Since these products
then combine as sums and differences with themselves
and with the original frequencies, the following additional 
products can occur: 
(2 x f1)
(2 x f2)
(3 x f1)
(3 x f2)
(2 x f1) ± f2
(2 x f2) ± f1
(3 x f1) ± f2
(3 x f2) ± f1
(2 x f1) ± (2 x f2)
(3 x f1) ± (2 x f2)
(3 x f2) ± (2 x f1)
(3 x f1) ± (3 x f2)
The "order" or type of IM product is identified by the
particular combination of frequencies that created it. The
order of an IM product is the sum of the multipliers 
(coefficients) of the frequencies in the expressions above.
The complete group of possible frequencies (original 
frequencies, intermodulation products and combinations)
that can exist when two systems (at 200 MHz and 195
MHz for this example) are operated simultaneously is thus:
Two-Transmitter Intermodulation Calculation
Product
Order        Frequency    Significant
f1 (original frequency) 1 
200
Yes
f2 (original frequency) 1 
195
Yes
2 x f1 
2 
400 
No
2 x f2 
2 
390
No
f1 + f2 
2 
395 
No
f1 - f2 
2 
5 
No
3 x f1 
3 
600 
No
3 x f2 
3 
585 
No
(2 x f1) + f2 
3 
595 
No
(2 x f1) - f2 
3 
205 
Yes
(2 x f2) + f1 
3 
580 
No
(2 x f2) - f1 
3 
190 
Yes
(3 x f1) + f2
4 
795 
No
(3 x f1) - f2 
4 
405 
No
(3 x f2) + f1 
4 
785 
No
(3 x f2) - f1 
4 
385
No
(2 x f1) + (2 x f2) 
4
790
No
(2 x f1) - (2 x f2) 
4 
10 
No
(3 x f1) + (2 x f2) 
5 
990 
No
(3 x f1) - (2 x f2) 
5 
210 
Yes
(3 x f2) + (2 x f1)
5
985
No
(3 x f2) - (2 x f1) 
5 
185
Yes
(3 x f1) + (3 x f2)
6
1185
No
(3 x f1) - (3 x f2) 
6
15
No
Though this list of calculated frequency combinations is
lengthy, it can be seen that only the IM products at 185,
190, 205 and 210 MHz are in the same general band as the
two original operating frequencies. These products will not
cause compatibility problems between the two original 
systems but can interfere with other systems that may be
added in this band. In this example, the operating frequency
of a third system should be chosen to avoid these four IM
frequencies. In general, only odd-order IM products are 
considered because even-order products typically fall well
away from the original frequencies, as shown above. 
Furthermore, though higher odd-order IM products may
also fall near the original frequencies, only 3rd order and 
5th order IM products are strong enough to be of concern.  
If three or more systems are operated simultaneously,
the situation becomes somewhat more complicated but the
same principles apply. In addition to the IM products 
calculated for each pair of frequencies, products due to
combinations of three transmitters must also be considered.  
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
59

In this example, the third system frequency (187
MHz) has been chosen to avoid the first two frequencies
and their respective IM products. A third system 
that coincided with an IM product may experience 
interference when its transmitter is far from its receiver
while the first two transmitters are close to each other and
to the third receiver.
Note that the addition of the third frequency creates
four new third-order, two-transmitter products as well as
three third-order, three transmitter products. In general, N
transmitters create N x (N-1) third-order, two-transmitter
IM products, as well as a number of third-order, threetransmitter products. Thus, the number of available 
frequencies for additional systems decreases exponentially
as the number of systems increases. For this reason, 
computer programs are used to generate and evaluate
compatible sets of frequencies.
5th order two-transmitter IM products are not usually
strong enough to cause problems, but may be a factor in
cases of extreme transmitter or receiver proximity. 
5th order three-transmitter IM products such as (3 x f1) -
f2 - f3 and (2 x f1) - (2 x f2) + f3 are generally too weak to
be of concern.
Maintaining adequate physical distance between 
transmitters and between transmitters and receivers will
minimize the creation of IM products. The figure below 
indicates the effect of distance on the amplitude of 3rd
order IM products created by two transmitters. 
60
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Appendix A
Reference Information
For determining compatibility of three frequencies
(200 MHz, 195 MHz and 187 MHz in this example)
the significant combinations become:  
Three-Transmitter Intermodulation Calculation
Product                                   Order              Frequency
f1 (original frequency)
1 
200
f2 (original frequency) 
1 
195
f3 (original frequency) 
1 
187
f1 + f2 - f3 
3 
208
f1 - f2 + f3 
3 
192
f2 + f3 - f1 
3 
182
(2 x f1) - f2 
3 
205
(2 x f2) - f1 
3 
190
(2 x f1) - f3 
3 
213
(2 x f3) - f1 
3 
174
(2 x f2) - f3 
3 
203
(2 x f3) - f2 
3 
179
(3 x f1) - (2 x f2)
5 
210
(3 x f2) - (2 x f1) 
5 
185
(3 x f1) - (2 x f3) 
5 
226
(3 x f3) - (2 x f1) 
5 
161
(3 x f2) - (2 x f3) 
5 
211
(3 x f3) - (2 x f2)
5 
171
two-transmitter IMD strength vs. transmitter separation
three-transmitter intermodulation
two-transmitter intermodulation

61
WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
US Television Channels
(Analog Components)
Appendix B
Reference Information
DTV transition and 700 MHz Re-Allocation
Channel
Band
Video
Chroma
Audio
VHF Low Band
2
54-60
55.25
58.83
59.75
3
60-66
61.25
64.83
65.75
4
66-72
67.25
70.83
71.75
5
76-82
77.25
80.83
81.75
6
82-88
83.25
86.83
87.75
VHF High Band
7
174-180
175.25
178.83
179.75
8
180-186
181.25
184.83
185.75
9
186-192
187.25
190.83
191.75
10
192-198
193.25
196.83
197.75
11
198-204
199.25
202.83
203.75
12
204-210
205.25
208.83
209.75
13
210-216
211.25
214.83
215.75
UHF Band
14
470-476
471.25
474.83
475.75
15
476-482
477.25
480.83
481.75
16
482-488
483.25
486.83
487.75
17
488-494
489.25
492.83
493.75
18
494-500
495.25
498.83
499.75
19
500-506
501.25
504.83
505.75
20
506-512
507.25
510.83
511.75
21
512-518
513.25
516.83
517.75
22
518-524
519.25
522.83
523.75
23
524-530
525.25
528.83
529.75
24
530-536
531.25
534.83
535.75
25
536-542
537.25
540.83
541.75
26
542-548
543.25
546.83
547.75
27
548-554
549.25
552.83
553.75
28
554-560
555.25
558.83
559.75
29
560-566
561.25
564.83
565.75
30
566-572
567.25
570.83
571.75
31
572-578
573.25
576.83
577.75
32
578-584
579.25
582.83
583.75
33
584-590
585.25
588.83
589.75
34
590-596
591.25
594.83
595.75
35
596-602
597.25
600.83
601.75
36
602-608
603.25
606.83
607.75
37
608-614
Reserved for radio-astronomy
38
614-620
615.25
618.83
619.75
39
620-626
621.25
624.83
625.75
40
626-632
627.25
630.83
631.75
41
632-638
633.25
636.83
637.75
42
638-644
639.25
642.83
643.75
43
644-650
645.25
648.83
649.74
44
650-656
651.25
654.83
655.75
45
656-662
657.25
660.83
661.75
46
662-668
663.25
666.83
667.75
47
668-674
669.25
672.83
673.75
48
674-680
675.25
678.83
679.75
49
680-686
681.25
684.83
685.75
50
686-692
687.25
690.83
691.75
51
692-698
693.25
696.83
697.75
Channel
Band
Video
Chroma
Audio
Reallocated
52
698-704
699.25
702.83
703.75
53
704-710
705.25
708.83
709.75
54
710-716
711.25
714.83
715.75
55
716-722
717.25
720.83
721.75
56
722-728
723.25
726.83
727.75
57
728-734
729.25
732.83
733.75
58
734-740
735.25
738.83
739.75
59
740-746
741.25
744.83
745.75
60
746-752
747.25
750.83
751.75
61
752-758
753.25
756.83
757.75
62
758-764
759.25
762.83
763.75
63
764-770
765.25
768.83
769.75
64
770-776
771.25
774.83
775.75
65
776-782
777.25
780.83
781.75
66
782-788
783.25
786.83
787.75
67
788-794
789.25
792.83
793.75
68
794-800
795.25
798.83
799.75
69
800-806
801.25
804.83
805.75
Radio Astronom y
14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69
470-476
476-482
482-488
488-494
494-500
500-506
506-512
512-518
518-524
524-530
530-536
536-542
542-548
548-554
554-560
560-566
566-572
572-578
578-584
584-590
590-596
596-602
602-608
608-614
614-620
620-626
626-632
632-638
638-644
644-650
650-656
656-662
662-668
668-674
674-680
680-686
686-692
692-698
698-704
704-710
710-716
716-722
722-728
728-734
734-740
740-746
746-752
752-758
758-764
764-770
770-776
776-782
782-788
788-794
794-800
800-806
Auction
Public
Safety
DTV only
DTV only
DTV only
DTV only
698 MHz͞
ŽƌĞdsĂŶĚ͟͞
ϳϬϬD,ǌĂŶĚ͟

Absorption
The weakening of radio wave strength by losses in various materials
ADC
Analog-to-digital converter, also abbreviated A/D
AF
Audio frequencies, typically 20-20,000 Hz.
AM
Amplitude modulation
Ambient
Local or background, ie. ambient noise
Amplitude
Magnitude or strength of a signal or wave
AM rejection 
Ability of an FM receiver to reject signals from AM transmitters and/or 
AM noise from electrical devices or natural sources
Antenna
Electrical circuit element that transmits or receives radio waves
Antenna gain
Measure of antenna efficiency compared to a reference antenna, ie. dBi =
gain relative to theoretical isotropic (spherical omnidirectional) antenna
Antenna splitter
A device for electrically matching a single antenna to multiple receivers
ASK
Amplitude shift keying
Attenuation
Measure of the loss of amplitude of a signal
Band
A defined portion of the frequency spectrum
Bandwidth
A measure of the frequency range of a signal or device
Base frequency
The actual frequency of a crystal oscillator, usually then multiplied to 
some higher operating frequency
Bias voltage
A fixed DC voltage which establishes the operating characteristic of a 
circuit element such as a transistor
Bit
Smallest digital data element, has a value of "0" or "1"
Bodypack
Transmitter style which can be worn on the body
Capture
The effect of a strong FM signal suppressing weaker signals at the receiver
Carrier
The basic or unmodulated radio wave
Cascade
Active antenna output port of receiver or antenna splitter than can feed
another receiver or antenna splitter
Codec
Software algorithm for data compression and decompression 
(code-decode)
Compander
A two-step noise reduction system consisting of a compressor in the 
transmitter and an expander in the receiver
Compressor
A circuit which reduces the dynamic range of a signal by a fixed ratio, 
typically 2:1 in a compander system
DAC
Digital-to-analog converter, also abbreviated D/A
dBm
Ratio of power levels relative to one milliwatt, ie. 0dBm = 1mW, 
10dBm = 10mW
DECT
Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications, standard for digital 
cordless telephones, ie. 1920-1930 MHz in the US, different bands in
other countries
De-emphasis
A fixed equalization which typically rolls off high frequencies in the 
second step of a two-step noise reduction process
Demodulation
The recovery of the original modulating information from a radio signal
Detector
The circuitry that performs demodulation
Deviation
The maximum frequency variation of an FM signal
Diffraction
The bending or partial reflection of radio waves by metal objects
Dipole
An antenna which is made up of two active elements
Direct
Not reflected
Direct sequence spreading
Spread spectrum technique using continuous, synchronized deviation
changes across a wide frequency range
Distortion
Any unwanted difference between the original and final version of a signal
Diversity
Scheme that relies on statistical decorrelation of the same signal 
received at multiple locations to minimize signal fading and multipath
dropout, also called space diversity or antenna diversity
Dropout
The complete loss of received signal due to multipath interference
DSP
Digital Signal Processor, used in digital and hybrid radio circuits
Dynamic range
Maximum amplitude range of a signal or device, generally the difference
between the strongest and weakest signals that occur or that the device
can handle
Encryption
Encoding a transmitted signal so that it can be decoded only with a
unique digital "key"
EM
Electromagnetic
ERP
Effective radiated power, the actual power radiated by a transmitter 
antenna
Expander
A circuit which expands the dynamic range of a signal by a finite ratio, 
typically 1:2 in a compander system
Fading
Loss of signal strength due to distance or obstacles in the signal path
FCC
Federal Communications Commission, US radio regulatory agency
Field
A distribution of energy in space, ie. electric, magnetic, sound
Field strength
The amplitude of a field at a given point, measured in volts per meter 
for electric energy
Glossary
Reference Information
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
62

FM
Frequency modulation
Frequency
A measure of the rate of variation of a wave or signal
Frequency agile
Having the ability to change frequencies: tuneable
Frequency diversity
Scheme that relies on statistical decorrelation of the same signal transmitted
and received at multiple frequencies to minimize RF interference effects
Frequency hopping
Spread spectrum technique using continuous, synchronized frequency
changes across a wide frequency range
Frequency response
Variation in amplitude of a signal over a range of frequencies
Front end
Initial filter stage of a receiver
FSK
Frequency shift keying
Gain
Amplification
Geolocation
Ability of a TVBD to determine its geographic location
Ground plane
Electrical approximation of a zero-potential reflective surface at the base 
of an antenna
GSM
Global Systems for Mobile Communications, mobile telephone standard,
ie. 850 Mz and 1900 MHz in the US, different bands in other countries
Handheld
Transmitter type which can be held in the hand 
Hash
A term for audible radio interference
Helical
Wideband directional antenna consisting of a single circularly-polarized 
element
Heterodyne
To combine signals of various frequency in a manner that produces 
additional signals at frequencies which are sums and differences of the
original frequencies
Hybrid
Radio design combining digital audio processing with analog transmission
IEM
In ear monitor
IF
Intermediate frequency, a lower radio frequency (typically 10.7 MHz)
found in the middle stages of a receiver
IFB
Interruptible fold back, a cueing system used in broadcast
IF filter
A narrow, band-pass filter tuned to the intermediate frequency (IF)
IM
Intermodulation, frequencies produced by combinations of other 
frequencies in non-linear devices 
IMD
Intermodulation distortion (another name for IM)
IM rejection 
Ability of a receiver to reject IM products
Image
An interfering frequency which differs from the desired frequency by
twice the intermediate frequency (IF)
Image rejection
The ability of a receiver to reject interference from an image frequency 
(determined by the front end)
Impedance
A measure of the resistance to current flow in a circuit (may vary 
with frequency)
Indirect
Reflected or diffracted
Intercept (third order)
A measure of the ability of a radio input stage to handle high signal levels
without overload or distortion 
Inverse square law
Mathematical relationship in which one quantity is inversely proportional
to the square of another quantity, ie. signal strength decreases according
to the distance squared
Latency
Signal delay that occurs in digital systems due to finite speed of DSP,
ADC, and DAC circuits
Level
The amplitude or strength of a signal
LF
Low frequency
Limiter
A circuit which limits the maximum level of a signal
Line-of-sight
Preferred wireless operating condition where transmit antenna is visible 
to receive antenna with no obstruction
LO
Local oscillator, in a receiver it is tuned to a frequency which is offset 
from the operating frequency by an amount equal to the intermediate 
frequency (IF)
Log periodic
Wideband directional antenna consisting of multiple logarithmic-spaced
dipole elements
Loss
Decrease in signal strength during transmission, propagation or reception
Medium
Substance through which a wave propagates; for radio it may be vacuum,
gas, liquid or solid; wave speed is affected by medium
Mixer
Circuitry in a receiver that combines the received signal with the local 
oscillator to produce the IF signal 
Modulating frequency
The frequency of the audio signal used for modulation of the radio wave
Modulation
Variation of a wave parameter (such as amplitude or frequency) to carry
information
Modulation noise
Low level noise which accompanies the audio signal in a companded 
wireless microphone system
Multipath
Reflection of radio waves that causes fluctuation in received signal strength
Narrow band
An FM signal in which the deviation is much less than the modulating 
frequency
Glossary
Reference Information
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
63

Noise
Undesirable random audio or radio energy 
Operating frequency
The final output frequency of a transmitter or the tuned frequency 
of a receiver
Oscillator
A circuit that produces a continuous periodic output
Phase-lock-loop (PLL) 
A circuit which maintains a desired frequency by means of a selfcorrecting feedback technique
Plug-on
A transmitter type which may be attached directly to a microphone
PM
Phase modulation
Point-to-point
Transmission of signal from one fixed location to another fixed location
Polarization
The orientation of the electric field component of a radio wave
Power
Usually refers to the RF power delivered to the transmitter antenna, 
measured in milliwatts (mW)
Pre-emphasis
A fixed equalization which typically boosts high frequencies in the first 
part of a two-step noise reduction process
Propagation
Ability of radio signal to travel a significant distance
Protected channels
Designated TVBD-free TV channels at a given location, defined by FCC rules
PSK
Phase shift keying
QPSK
Quadrature Phase Shift Key, a digital transmission symbol coding with 
four possible values
Quadrature
Phase relationship of 900 between two signals
Quieting
The suppression of radio noise in a receiver when the desired signal is
picked up at a certain strength
Radio waves
Electromagnetic waves which propagate a significant distance from the
source
RCV
Abbreviation for Receiver
Receiver
Device which is sensitive to radio signals and recovers information from them
Reciprocal
Property of a passive antenna to operate equivalently either in transmit or
in receive mode
Reflection
Retransmission of incident radio waves by metal objects
RF
Radio frequency, generally taken to mean well above 20,000 Hz
RFI
Radio frequency interference
Sampling
Conversion of a continuous audio waveform into discrete digital values
Selectivity
Measure of a receiver’s ability to discriminate between closely-spaced 
frequencies
Sensitivity
Measure of a receiver’s ability to respond to weak radio signals
Shadow
Blocking of radio waves by reflective or absorptive (lossy) objects
Shift keying
Modulation of a radio wave in discrete steps, used for digital signal 
transmission
Signal-to-noise ratio
Overall useable amplitude range of a signal or device, generally the 
difference between some reference level and the residual noise level
SINAD
A measure of receiver sensitivity stated as the RF signal strength 
required for given minimum signal-to-noise + distortion ratio 
Spread spectrum
A radio transmission technique which spreads the energy of the signal
over a wide frequency range rather than concentrating it at one frequency
Spurious emissions (spur)
Residual output from crystal-controlled transmitters occurring at 
frequencies that are offset from the operating frequency by multiples of
the crystal base frequency
Spurious rejection
The ability of a receiver to reject spurious emissions
Squelch
Circuit in a receiver that mutes the audio output in the absence of the 
desired transmitter signal
Spectrum
A range of discrete frequencies
STL
Studio Transmitter Link, in the US: 944-952 MHz
Superheterodyne
In a receiver, the technique of filtering the received signal to eliminate 
possible image frequencies and then mixing the received signal frequency
with the local oscillator (LO) to produce the intermediate frequency (IF)
Symbol
Digital data element that contains more than one bit, ie. a QPSK 
symbol contains two bits
Transmitter
Device which converts information to a radio signal
TVBD
Television Band Device, sometimes called White Space Device
TX
Abbreviation for transmitter
UHF
Ultra high frequency (about 300 - 3000 MHz)
VCA
Voltage controlled amplifier, used in audio compressor and expander circuits
VCO
Voltage controlled oscillator, used in radio tuning circuits
VHF
Very high frequency (about 30 - 300 MHz)
Wavelength
The physical distance between successive complete cycles of a wave, 
inversely proportional to frequency, dependent on properties of medium
White Space
Unoccupied space between active TV channels
Wideband
An FM signal in which the deviation is much greater than the modulating
frequency
Glossary
Reference Information
Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
64

Microphone Systems
Selection and Operation of
WIRELESS
65
Chapter 1
Figure 1-1:
radio wave  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Figure 1-2:
frequency vs. wavelength  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Figure 1-3: 
the wave equation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Figure 1-4: 
propagation: wavelength vs. openings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Figure 1-5: 
propagation: wavelength vs. obstacles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Figure 1-6: 
amplitude modulation (AM)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Figure 1-7:
frequency modulation (FM)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Chapter 2
Figure 2-1:
general radio system diagram  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Figure 2-2:
examples of transmitters 
(handheld, bodypack, plug-on)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Figure 2-3:
general transmitter block diagram  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Figure 2-4a:
pre-emphasis in transmitter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Figure 2-4b:
de-emphasis in transmitter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Figure 2-5a:
compander (2:1, fixed rate)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Figure 2-5b:
compander (variable)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Figure 2-6a:
unmodulated FM signal spectrum  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Figure 2-6b:
modulated FM signal spectrum  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Figure 2-7:
crystal-controlled transmitter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Figure 2-8:
frequency-synthesized transmitter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Figure 2-9:
receiver examples (fixed, portable)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Figure 2-10:
general receiver block diagram  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12  
Figure 2-11:
track tuning front-end filter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Figure 2-12a:
single conversion, crystal-controlled receiver  . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Figure 2-12b:
single conversion, frequency-synthesized receiver . . . . . . . . . 13
Figure 2-13:
receiver, filter characteristic  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Figure 2-14a:
double conversion, crystal-controlled receiver  . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Figure 2-14b:
double conversion, frequency-synthesized receiver . . . . . . . . 14
Figure 2-15:
threshold squelch  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Figure 2-16:
noise squelch  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Figure 2-17:
examples of receivers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Figure 2-18:
multipath  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Figure 2-19:
signal level at two antennas with multipath  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Figure 2-20:
passive antenna combining  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Figure 2-21:
antenna phase switching  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Figure 2-22:
antenna switching  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Figure 2-23:
receiver switching  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Figure 2-24:
receiver combining  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Figure 2-25:
transmitter antenna examples 
(trailing wire, rubber-duckie, internal)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Figure 2-26:
wideband omnidirectional antenna  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Figure 2-27:
1/4 wave and 1/2 wave antennas UHF range  . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Figure 2-28:
examples of remote receiver antennas 
(1/2 wave with amplifier, log periodic, helical)  . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Figure 2-29:
log periodic antenna polar pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Figure 2-30:
comparison of coaxial cable types  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Figure 2-31:
coaxial antenna cable loss at VHF and UHF frequencies . . . 21
Figure 2-32:
multi-room antenna distribution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Figure 2-33:
passive antenna distribution   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Figure 2-34a:
active antenna distribution (one level)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Figure 2-34b:
active antenna distribution (two level)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Figure 2-35:
antenna amplifiers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Chapter 3
Figure 3-1:
wireless frequency bands in the United States  . . . . . . . . . . 23
Figure 3-2:
VHF allocations in the United States 
(30-300 MHz)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Figure 3-3:
UHF allocations in the United States 
(300 MHz - 3GHz)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Figure 3-4:
linear vs. non-linear circuits  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Figure 3-5:
two-transmitter intermodulation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Figure 3-6:
three-transmitter intermodulation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Figure 3-7:
two-transmitter IMD strength vs. 
transmitter separation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Figure 3-8:
local oscillator (LO) interference  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Figure 3-9a:
image frequency interference (low-side injection)  . . . . . . . . 29
Figure 3-9b:
image frequency interference (high-side injection)  . . . . . . . 29
Figure 3-10:
crystal harmonics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Figure 3-11a:
analog television channel spectrum  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Figure 3-11b:
digital television channel spectrum (DTV)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Figure 3-12:
DTV transition and 700 MHz re-allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Figure 3-13:
loss vs. distance vs. frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Figure 3-14:
frequency hopping spectrum  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Figure 3-15:
direct sequence spectrum  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Figure 3-16:
2FSK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Figure 3-17:
QPSK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Figure 3-18:
frequency-synthesized digital transmitter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Figure 3-19:
frequency-synthesized digital receiver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Figure 3-20:
international wireless frequencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Chapter 4
Figure 4-1:
examples of transmitters 
(handheld, bodypack, plug-on)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Figure 4-2:
examples of input connectors 
(1/4”, mini XLR, Lemo)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Figure 4-3:
proper and improper antenna positions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Figure 4-4:
receiver examples (fixed, portable)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Figure 4-5:
examples of receiver audio output  
and antenna input connectors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Figure 4-6:
proper and improper antenna and receiver 
placement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Figure 4-7:
alkaline vs. rechargeable batteries  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Figure 4-8:
Shure Axient Wireless System  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
Chapter 5
Figure 5-1:
point-to-point using a wireless microphone system . . . . . . . 56
Figure 5-2:
point-to-point using an IEM system
(with directional antennas for maximum range)  . . . . . . . . . 56
Illustrations Included In This Booklet
Reference Information

WIRELESS
Selection and Operation of
Microphone Systems
Reference Information
Tim is a native of the south side of Chicago (Go White
Sox!). A lifelong interest in both entertainment and science
has led to the field of audio as his choice for combining
these interests in a useful way. Prior to joining Shure he
worked as an engineer for recording, radio and live sound,
operated his own recording studio and sound company,
and continues to play music professionally. He holds a BS
degree in Aeronautical and Astronautical Engineering,
with a minor in Electrical Engineering, from the University
of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. While at the University, 
Tim also worked as chief technician with both the Speech
and Hearing Science and Linguistics departments. 
Since joining Shure in 1984, Tim has served in 
a technical support and training capacity for multiple 
departments. He has been active in product and 
applications education for Shure customers, dealers, and
installers, as well as company staff. His major goal has
been to increase the understanding of quality audio by
presenting technical information in a way that is thorough
but still very accessible. Tim's particular emphasis is on
the contribution of proper selection and technique for
both wired and wireless microphones.  
In addition, Tim has done technical presentations for
many industry organizations (NAB, NAMM, AES, and
SBE), as well as for US government entities such as 
the White House Communication Agency and the US 
Air Force. Through His international assignments he has
been fortunate to be able to deliver presentations in more
than twenty countries and on all but one of the continents
(still waiting for an offer from Antarctica...). 
He has provided specific applications assistance to
various performing artists including the Rolling Stones and
U2, for theme parks such as Disney and Universal 
Studios, and performance groups such as Cirque du Soleil. 
While at Shure, Tim has authored several educational
booklets including "Selection and Operation of Wireless
Microphone Systems" and "Audio Systems Guide for
Houses of Worship."
His articles have also appeared in Recording Engineer
Producer, Live Sound Magazine, Pro AV, Technologies for
Worship, and Church Sound Magazine.
BIOGRAPHY: Tim Vear
66
Biography
I would like to cite the following individuals at Shure Inc. for their extreme patience and invaluable assistance:
Edgar Reihl
Ahren Hartman
Davida Rochman
(and Stuart Baum, too!)
Thanks a ton!

Additional Shure Publications Available:
Printed and electronic versions of the following guides are available free of charge. 
To obtain your complimentary copies, call one of the phone numbers listed below 
or visit www.shure.com.  
• Selection and Operation of Personal Monitor Systems
• Audio Systems Guide for Houses of Worship
• Microphone Techniques for Studio Recording
• Microphone Techniques for Live Sound Reinforcement
Our Dedication to Quality Products
Shure offers a complete line of microphones and wireless microphone systems for everyone 
from first-time users to professionals in the music industry–for nearly every possible application.
For over eight decades, the Shure name has been synonymous with quality audio.  
All Shure products are designed to provide consistent, high-quality performance under the 
most extreme real-life operating conditions.
©2014 Shure Incorporated  
AL25573     8/14
Asia, Paciﬁc:
Shure Asia Limited
22/F, 625 King’s Road
North Point, Island East
Hong Kong
Phone: +852-2893-4290
Fax: +852-2893-4055
Email: info@shure.com.hk
www.shureasia.com
United States, Canada, 
Latin America, Caribbean:
Shure Incorporated
5800 West Touhy Avenue
Niles, IL 60714-4608 USA
Phone: +1 847-600-2000
Fax: +1 847-600-1212 (USA)
Fax: +1 847-600-6446
Email: info@shure.com
www.shure.com
©2013 Shure Incorporated
Europe, Middle East, Africa:
Shure Europe GmbH
Jakob-Dieffenbacher-Str. 12,
75031 Eppingen, Germany
Phone: +49-7262-92490
Fax: +49-7262-9249114
Email: info@shure.de
www.shure.eu
