Scanner Technical Brief—Page 1
6/07
This technical brief provides detailed information on the Image Quality, Performance, and Flexibility of Epson 
Scanners.
Image Quality—Factors affecting image quality
When comparing scanners, hardware resolution and color pixel depth are two features often used to gauge 
image quality. These two features are important, but there are a number of factors that determine image 
quality in a scanner, such as the following: (Many of these elements will be discussed in detail in upcoming 
sections of this document.)
The Epson Expression® and GT series scanners are Epson’s professional series scanners designed for excellence with respect to image quality, speed, usability, versatility, and durability. These scanners include the 
highest quality components.
Precision stepper motor 
for high quality sub-scan 
resolution
Dynamic range control
Type of lamp system used
Optic system
Optical resolution and 
color bit depth
Quality of the Analog to Digital converter (ADC); Epson scanners have 
optimum performance for minimal 
noise and tight color registration.
Type of focus method
Color vs. monochrome CCD
The Epson Perfection® series scanners are designed for home and entry-level corporate and graphics arts 
users, and are designed with the highest quality components in their price class.
Image Quality—Resolution
A scanner’s resolution determines the amount of data that is read by the scanner. As resolution increases, so 
does the ﬁle size. Resolution is measured in a variety of ways.
1. Optical resolution: This is the actual number of pixels read by the CCD (Charge Coupled Device), which 
measures the intensity of the light that is reﬂected from the image to be scanned, and converts it to an 
analog voltage. If a scanner has a resolution of 600 x 2400 dpi, its optical resolution is 600 dpi, which 
means that it can resolve 600 bits of data per inch.
2. Hardware resolution: Using a precision stepper motor to double-step or 
quadruple-step the carriage, the scanner’s sub-scanner resolution can be 
increased. For example, a scanner can have an optical resolution of 1200 
dpi, but a hardware resolution of 1200 x 2400 dpi (because it double-steps 
the carriage to increase the vertical resolution).
 
 
2400 dpi
1200 dpi

Scanner Technical Brief—Page 2
6/07
Image Quality—Resolution (cont.)
3. Interpolated resolution: Interpolation is a method to increase the resolution of an image. It uses a 
complex algorithm to “add” pixels to an image based on the mathematical probability of surrounding 
pixels.
 
For example, if a scanner has a hardware resolution of 1200 x 2400 dpi, and a maximum resolution of 
9600 x 9600 dpi, the scanning software uses interpolation to create scanned images with resolutions 
greater than the hardware resolution.
4. Beneﬁts of higher optical resolution: Higher resolution allows you to scan the following types of images without using interpolation. Using actual image data instead of interpolated data results in more 
accurate images.
Line Art
When scanning black and white line art, image pixels translate exactly 
to the printed dots. Therefore, high resolution is required to capture 
and print the sharp lines and edges of an image.
Enlarging a small original
In order to capture enough detail to enlarge an image, you must 
increase the scanned resolution in proportion to the increase in image 
size. If you don’t, then you will have to interpolate image data to 
maintain the same resolution in the larger image.
Precise pixel editing
Many graphic artists scan images at high resolutions for precise pixel 
editing. It is always better to capture the image data when the image 
is being scanned and use true image data than to use interpolation if 
more data is needed later.
Image Quality—Pixel depth
Pixel depth refers to the number of bits of data captured for each picture element (pixel). Each pixel can 
have two states (On or Off); therefore the number of colors or gray scales that a scanner can recognize is 
computed by taking the pizel depth as an exponent of two. The following charts lists the number of colors 
recognized for each different scan mode.
Scan mode
Number of colors recognized
Bi-level (1 bit per pixel) 21 = 2 colors (black and white)
8-bit gray scale 28 = 256 shades of gray
10-bit gray scale 210 = 1,024 shades of gray
8-bit  color (indexed color) 28 = 256 colors
24-bit RGB (8 bits per pixel, per color) 224 = 16.7 millions colors
36-bit RGB (12 bits per pixel, per color 236 = Over 68 billion colors
48-bit RGB (16 bits per pixel, per color) 248 = Over 250 trillion colors
2 x 2.5 inch 
image scanned 
at 1200 dpi
If enlarged to 8 x 
10 inches, effective 
resolution: 300 dpi

Scanner Technical Brief—Page 3
6/07
Image Quality—Pixel depth (cont.)
Key Differences 42-bit, or 48-bit Internal/ 24-bit External Color 
Depth
36-bit, 42-bit, or 48-bit Internal and External
Color Depth
How it works The scanner captures 42-, or 48-bit image
data, but “downsamples” an image to
24-bits, keeping the most signiﬁ cant color
data.
The scanner captures 36-, 42-, or 48bit image data and outputs all data to a 
software aplication that supports 48-bit
image ﬁ les (such as Adobe® Photoshop®).
Image quality Because the scanner captures data that
never could have been read by a 24-bit or
30-bit scanner (such as the detail in dark 
areas and slight color transitions), the 
scanner delivers more accurate images
With a 48-bit image ﬁ le, you always have
access to full image data, which is especially important to graphic artists and
designers.
48-bit capture
24-bit transfer
48-bit capture
48-bit transfer 
All Epson scanners have a 42-bit or 48-bit color depth. but some of the models support 24-bit external color 
depth, which is the data that is sent from the scanner to the computer. Here are the differences between 
output color depth:
A greater color bit depth generally results in more accurate color reproduction, smoother gradations with 
fewer sudden shifts in color, and detailed shadows and highlights.
Image Quality—Epson ColorTrue® Imaging System
Epson scanners use the Epson ColorTrue II Imaging System which is made up of three main elements 
(hardware, optics, and processing) and result in superior image quality with fast processing speeds.
Precise scan carriage
Simultaneous RGB scanning
Pixel optimization
Custom ASIC
High resolution CCD
Custom glass lenses

Scanner Technical Brief—Page 4
6/07
Image Quality—Epson ColorTrue® Imaging System (cont.)
1. Hardware components: Epson scanners use a precise scan carriage with better motors to achieve subscan 
resolutions that are double or quadruple the scanner’s optical resolution. Additionally, Epson scanners 
capture Red, Green, and Blue simultaneously, versus other scanners that use one-pass scanning but 
alternate Red, Green, and Blue lights for each line of a scan. Epson advantages are:
 Better color registration
 Faster scanning speeds
 Higher quality sub-scan resolutions
Through a combination of these hardware, optics, and processing features, the Epson ColorTrue Imaging 
System and Epson ColorTrue II Imaging System deliver scanned images with:
Smooth gradations
Smooth edges and 
minimal color fringing
Greater detail in shadows
Accurate colors
Greater detail in 
highlights
Sharp image quality 
without distortion
Epson Method
(1/2 or 1/4 step carriage movement)
Single-Pass Alternate RGB Method 
(1/2 step carriage movement)
Simultaneous RGB Capture
One pass
Red Capture
Green Capture
Blue Capture
One pass
2. Optics: Epson scanners use custom lenses that are designed speciﬁcally to work with Epson technology 
and the scanner’s CCD. These lenses feature:
 Larger “sweet spot” and precision lenses for reduced distortion
 Accurately aligned lens elements to control sharpness
 Glass lenses (versus plastic lenses used by many competitors) 
which offer better reﬂective qualities, providing greater image 
quality.
 Better image quality than competitive off-the-shelf lenses 
because Epson scanners feature custom-made lenses that 
match the CCD.
Small “sweet spot” 
can allow edge 
distortion
Larger “sweet 
spot” minimizes 
distortion

Scanner Technical Brief—Page 5
6/07
3. Processing: Many Epson scanners use a custom ASIC (Application Speciﬁ c Integrated Circuit) for fast 
scanning. Key features include:
 Line correction captures and processes full RGB color for every pixel and minimizes color fringing in 
subscan direction.
 Zoom capability enables smoothest edges along diagonal or curved lines and achieves higher 
interpolated resolution
 On-board memory allows for Auto Area Segmentation (AAS) and Text Enhancement Technology (TET) 
processing within the scanner—AAS and TET are independent from PC or Macintosh processing, 
allowing the scanner to work with better “raw” data.
Additionally, Epson scanners have a pixel optimization feature 
that uses the full resolution of the scanner’s CCD, even scanning 
at a lesser resolution. The beneﬁ t of this feature is truer image 
quality.
 For example, on one of the Epson 600 dpi Perfection 
scanners, when scanning an image at 300 dpi, the scanner 
still uses all 600 pixels per inch to scan the image, then 
averages the data to yield the lower resolution image.
 Some competitive models lower resolution by turning off 
some pixels to capture less image data.
Image Quality—Epson ColorTrue® Imaging System (cont.)
Image Quality—Color CCD
All Epson scanners use a color CCD which uses a single white light source, instead of a monochrome CCD 
and three light sources. The color CCD results in faster scanning speeds and the ability to scan threedimensional objects without producing color “ghosts.”
Key Differences Color CCD
Monochrome CCD
How it works Red, green, and blue are quickly captured
in the color CCD illuminated by a single
light source.
three separate lamps are ﬁ red for eachline
of a scan, slowing the scanning speed.
Result when
scanning threedimensional objects
Single light source allows precise
alignment when scanning non-ﬂ at
surfaces
The three lamps can cause misalignment
when reﬂ ected from non-ﬂ at surfaces.
Glass
Monochrome 
CCD
Red light 
source
Green light 
source
Blue light 
source
Glass
Color CCD
White light 
source
On
Off
On
Off
On
Off
Epson Method:
Competitive Method:
Average
Average
Average
600 dpi
600 dpi
300 dpi
300 dpi

Scanner Technical Brief—Page 6
6/07
Image Quality—Dynamic Range
Dynamic range measures the difference between the lightest highlights and darkest shadows that a scanner 
can perceive (on a scale of 3.0 to 4.0). The maximum density rating is referred to as Dmax.
A dynamic range measurement is important for 
designers who scan transparent media (such as slides, 
transparencies, and negatives) because the media 
itself generally has a dynamic range of 3.2. Reﬂective 
media, such as a photograph, generally does not have 
a dynamic range greater than 2.0.
 A high dynamic range results in scanned images 
with superior detail in highlights and in shadows— 
especially when scanning transparent media.
Superior detail 
in highlights
Superior detail 
in shadows
Image Quality—Focus Method
1. Fixed Focus: With this type of focus system, the lens is set to record everything sharply from a ﬁxed 
distance—from the lens to the glass scanning bed. The Epson Perfection and GT series scanners use a 
ﬁxed focus optics system. The newest Epson scanners have a ﬁxed focal point just above the surface of the 
glass for optimized ﬁlm scanning.
3. Dual-Focus mechanism: One of the Epson Expression series scanners uses a 
Dual-Focus mechanism. When using the scanner’s custom ﬁlm holders to scan 
transparent media, you can set the scanner’s focal distance to compensate for the 
2.5mm distance between the glass and the media. This method eliminates the 
“Newton Ring” problem that plagues less sophisticated scanners. Newton Rings are the circular rainbowcolored patterns that appear in a scanned image, caused by surface tension. This effect is similar to the 
rainbows that appear in soap bubbles.
Epson scanners use a ﬁxed focus system, AutoFocus optics system, or a Dual-Focus mechanism.
Standard ﬁxed focus
Epson automatic/manual focus
2. AutoFocus optics system: Epson highest-end graphic 
arts scanners use an AutoFocus optics system that can 
be used in AutoFocus mode or manual mode. This 
system offers these beneﬁts:
 The Epson manual/automatic focus optics system 
gives you precised sharpness control, especially 
when scanning three-dimensional objects and 
transparencies.
 With three-dimensional images, you can pick 
your point of focus so that background items are 
captured with sharp detail, as shown in the glove 
and towel in the images to the right.
 For super sharpness when scanning transparencies 
or slides mounted in holders, you can set the focus 
to compensate for the 2.5mm distance between the 
glass and the slide.

Scanner Technical Brief—Page 7
6/07
Image Quality—Dual Lens System
A unique Dual Lens System, available on some Epson 
scanners, automatically selects from two lenses for 
the desired scan resolution.
Some Epson Perfection scanners 
offers 4800 dpi optical resolution 
with the High Resolution lens.  
For a higher resolution of  6400 dpi, 
the Super Resolution Lens can scan 
slides and ﬁ lm with the bundled ﬁ lm 
holders with a scanning width of 5.9 
inches.
Dual Lens System offers 
two lenses for two 
different resolutions.
High Resolution lens
Super Resolution lens
Document (8.5”)
Film Area Guide (8”)
High resolution lens
Super resolution lens
Film Holder (5.9”)
Image Quality—High-Pass Optics
Ghost image
Epson High Pass Optics includes anti-reﬂ ection optical coatings and a high reﬂ ection mirror.
 There is typically a small percentage of unwanted reﬂ ection with standard CCD glass which can 
cause abnormal ghost images. The anti-reﬂ ection optical coating on the CCD cover glass minimizes 
this reﬂ ection and reduces ghost images.
 With a higher reﬂ ection rate, ﬁ lm scanning speed is faster.
Improved 
image quality
Scanned with normal CCD glass
Scanned with anti-reﬂ ection 
optical coating

Scanner Technical Brief—Page 8
6/07
Performance—Batch Scanning
Epson scanning software supports batch 
scanning:
 Without batch scanning, you must scan 
each image separately.
 With batch scanning you can deﬁ ne 
customized settings for each framed 
original, then capture each one as a 
separate ﬁ le—all with one scan.
Place originals on 
the scanning bed
Select and deﬁ ne frames in 
the scanner driver, and scan!
Performance—High-Performance Interfaces
In general, Epson scanners targeted to home and small ofﬁ ce users have a USB interface for maximum ease 
of use. Epson scanners targeted to corporate and graphic arts uses have USB and/or SCSI-2 interfaces for 
maximum performance. An optional interface for some scanners is the IEEE-1394 (FireWire®) interface.
The key differences between the scanner interfaces are:
Key Differences USB 1.1/2.0
SCSI-2 narrow/wide
FireWire
Macintosh
connection
Direct connection to
USB-ready Macintosh
computers
Direct connection to SCSI
port or installed Fast SCSI
PCI interface card
Direct connection to FireWireready Power Macintosh computers and to any PCI Macintosh
with an Apple® FireWire Kit
PC connection Direct connection to
USB port
Requires Fast SCSI PCI interface card
Direct connection to FireWire
port or an installed FireWire card
Daisy chaining Yes, up to 127 devices 
via USB hub
Yes, up to 8 devices
Yes, up to 63 devices
Hot plugging* Yes
No
Yes
Performance Up to 1.5/60 MBps
Up to 10/20 MBps
Up to 50 MBps
* Hot plugging allows you to attach or detach the cable without powering off/on the scanner or computer.
Most Epson scanners that include a USB port offer the newer USB 2.0 (Hi-Speed USB). 
 Hi-Speed USB is backward compatible with USB 1.1, so if you have an older computer with a USB 
port, it will work with a new Epson scanner.
 You will see only the highest speeds on your scanner if you have a Hi-Speed USB port on both your 
computer and your scanner.
Flexibility—Intelligent Negative Scanning
With a transparency unit attached, Epson scanners can 
scan color negatives (such as 35mm negative strips) and 
convert them directly to positive images.
 Some other scanners can only scan positive 
transparent media, such as color transparencies 
and slides.
Negative
Positive
to

Scanner Technical Brief—Page 9
6/07
Flexibility—Network Scanning
Newer networkable Epson scanners offer the ability to connect to the network as a device (through a 
network card) and don’t have to connect through a speciﬁ c scan server.
Some other Epson scanners can be shared over a network, using the following procedure:
 Attach the scanner to a single computer on the network.
 Install Epson Scan Server (Windows only) on that computer.
 Install the Epson TWAIN Pro Network scanner driver on all computers that will access the scanner 
over the network.
Flexibility—Epson Scan with Epson Easy Photo Fix™ Scanning Software
Epson Easy Photo Fix technology is a combination of powerful elements included in the latest Epson Scan 
driver:
 Epson Dust Removal instantly 
cleans up slides and negatives 
— with just one click!
 Epson exclusive Onetouch Color Restoration 
instantly (with just one 
click!) restores faded and 
discolored photographs, 
slides and negatives.
Original
Color corrected
Original
Dust removed and color corrected
 Epson Scan Grain Reduction smooths the grain that is sometimes evident at high scanning resolutions. 
When you scan a slide or ﬁ lm at a high resolution, the scanner is sensitive enough to pick up the slight 
shadows created by the individual crystal structures in the emulsion. When you choose Grain Reduction 
in the Epson Scan driver, the driver uses a slight blur effect to smooth out the grain.

Scanner Technical Brief—Page 10
6/07
DIGITAL ICE technology 
from Applied Science 
Fiction(ASF™) is a scanner 
feature that combines 
hardware and software to 
remove dust and scratches 
on ﬁlm and remove tears, 
folds, creases, and deep 
scratches on photos. This 
feature is not available on 
all Epson scanners.
Color photo before DIGITAL ICE
Color photo after DIGITAL ICE
Scratch
Fold
Flexibility—DIGITAL ICE™ technology from Applied Science Fiction™
Flexibility—Epson Scan
 Full Auto Mode: 
For the novice user—Epson Scan automatically previews the images and recognizes the document 
source and type. This mode then automatically crops, uses the auto-exposure settings to optimize 
images, and scans the image.
 Home Mode: 
For the intermediate user—allowing adjustments of the basic image settings. Icons represent 
common scan settings. Available options include automatic sizing, one-touch color restoration, 
brightness and contrast adjustment, and destination/resolution choices. This mode allows the 
advanced amateur to select the best of automated features and user-controlled settings.
 Professional Mode: 
For the advanced user—many options are available to give you greater control over your scanning. 
This mode allows the advanced user to have complete control over many sophisticated elements of 
pre-scanning. These elements include the Densitometer (a tool that allows a user to hit a speciﬁc 
color via numerical data), Multiple Marquee (for batch scanning), and Histogram (to correct tonal 
distribution).
 Ofﬁce Mode: 
For the business user—the Ofﬁce Mode is helpful when you need to scan a large number of 
documents with the same size, using the optional Automatic Document Feeder. You can scan 
documents easily and quickly without preview in this mode. 
Epson Scan software differs slightly by scanner model. Different scanners offer three of these four distinct 
scan modes to meet the needs of novice, intermediate, advanced, and business users.

Scanner Technical Brief—Page 11
6/07
Flexibility—Epson Smart Panel™ software
Epson Smart Panel allows you to scan and send data directly to an assigned application or to the Epson 
photo-sharing site. You can also obtain photos and documents in digital form quickly and easily. 
This version of the Epson Smart Panel 
includes the following features: 
 RePrint Photos
 Scan and Save
 Copy Center
 Edit Text
 Business Card
 Scan for Creativity
 Scan to Application
 Scan to E-mail
 Epson Photo Site
Flexibility—Fluid Mount Accessory
In cases where ﬁlm holders are not the best solutions for ﬁlm 
scanning, the ﬂuid mount accessory offers:
 Scratch removal from ﬁlm not supported by DIGITAL 
ICE™ technology such as black and white ﬁlm
 Easy scanning of ﬁlm that won’t ﬁt into standard ﬁlm 
holders
 Reduction of grain and 
prevention of Newton rings 
from curved ﬁlm
Scanned 
on the 
document 
glass, this 
image shows 
Newton rings 
and scratches.
Scanned 
using the 
ﬂuid mount 
accessory, the 
scratches and 
Newton rings 
are reduced.
Fluid Mount Accessory
EPSON is a registered trademark and Exceed Your Vision is a trademark of Seiko Epson Corporation. Epson Expression, Epson Perfection, and ColorTrue are 
registered trademarks and Micro Step Drive, Easy Photo Fix, Epson Smart Panel, are trademarks of Epson America, Inc. All other products and brands are 
trademarks and/or registered trademarks of their respective companies. Epson disclaims any and all rights in those marks. DIGITAL ICE is a trademark of 
Eastman Kodak Company.
©2007 Epson America, Inc.
