HDMI Specification 1.4b

 If you are having problems seeing website images please make sure you update your browser to the latest version.

 ×

 Chinese

|

 Extranet Login

 Home

 Specifications

 Specifications Overview

 HDMI Specification 2.2

 HDMI 2.2 Overview

 Bandwidths and Resolutions

 Ultra96 HDMI Cable and Ultra High Speed HDMI Cable

 Ultra96 Feature Name

 Latency Indication Protocol (LIP)

 Dynamic HDR

 Source-Based Tone Mapping (SBTM)

 Enhanced Audio Return Channel (eARC)

 Enhanced Gaming Features

 Variable Refresh Rate (VRR)

 Auto Low Latency Mode (ALLM)

 Quick Frame Transport (QFT)

 Quick Media Switching (QMS)

 Cable Power

 HDMI Specification 1.4b

 Premium Cable

 HDMI Passive Adapter

 Adopters

 Becoming an Adopter

 New HDMI Adopters

 HDMI Founders

 HDMI Adopters

 Embedded Licensees

 Terminated Adopters

 Enforcement Search Tool

 About HDMI Forum

 Adopter-Only Extranet

 Resources

 Resources Overview

 HDMI Cables

 Testing Resources

 Testing Policies

 Test Equipment Manufacturers

 Authorized Test Centers (ATC)

 Licensing and Trademarks

 HDMI as a Brand

 Trademarks Guidelines

 Royalty Discounts

 HDMI Logos

 Brand Enforcement

 Enforcement Search Tool

 Report an Infringer 

 Approved Connectors

 Press Events Social

 Press Releases

 Announcements

 Events & Plugfests

 HDMI Blog Posts

 Tweets @HDMI Licensing

 Press Resources

 Archives

 Press Releases

 Announcements

 Blogs

HDMI Specification 1.4b

HDMI 1.4b Specification, 4K support enables video resolutions beyond 1080p, supporting high-resolution displays that deliver movie theater-like experiences to the home with incredible depth, detail and color.

HDMI 1.4b Specification

The major features introduced in the HDMI® 1.4b specification include:

4K support enables video resolutions beyond 1080p, supporting high-resolution displays that deliver movie theater-like experiences to the home with incredible depth, detail and color. This includes support for 4096×2160 at 24 Hz, 3840×2160 at 24, 25, and 30 Hz, and 1920×1080 at 120 Hz. All resolutions and refresh rates can be support with the High Speed HDMI Cable.

HDMI Ethernet Channel adds high-speed networking to an HDMI link, allowing users to take full advantage of their IP-enabled devices without a separate Ethernet cable; a very important advantage with so many devices now connecting to the internet.This requires the use of the High Speed HDMI Cable with Ethernet. 

Audio Return Channel (ARC) allows an HDMI-connected TV to send audio data "upstream" to an AVR or soundbar with an HDMI cable, eliminating the need for a separate audio cable and making it easier to bring immersive movie theater sound to the living room.

3D support defines input/output protocols for several major 3D video formats enabling true 3D gaming and 3D home theater applications.

Content Type enables real-time signaling of content types between display and source devices, enabling a TV to optimize picture settings for the best viewing quality.

Additional Color Spaces add support for multiple color gamuts used in digital photography and computer graphics. In addition to RGB color and x.v.Color, support is now included for sYCC601 color, and Adobe RGB and YCC601 color.

HDMI Micro Connector is a new, smaller connector for phones and other portable devices, supporting video resolutions up to 1080p.

Automotive Connection System includes new cables and connectors for automotive video systems, designed to meet the unique demands of the motoring environment while delivering true HD quality to a seatback or dashboard display. 

HDMI 1.4b is also supported with the HDMI Alt Mode for USB Type-C™ Connector. 

The HDMI Alt Mode for USB Type-C connector will allow HDMI-enabled source devices to utilize a USB Type-C connector to directly connect to HDMI-enabled displays, and deliver native HDMI signals over a simple cable without the need for protocol and connector adapters or dongles. Please check our information pages on HDMI Alt Mode for USB Type-C.

The HDMI 1.4b Specification is available to all HDMI Adopters and can be downloaded from the HDMI Adopter extranet.

However, the updated 3D portion of the HDMI Specification Version 1.4b is available for public download.

HDMI Specification Ver. 1.3a download page.

Expanded HDMI 1.4 feature descriptions available to download.

HDMI® Licensing Administrator, Inc. (HDMI LA) is the agent appointed by the HDMI Forum to license Version 2.2 of the HDMI Specification and is the agent appointed by the HDMI Founders to license earlier HDMI Specifications.

Latest Posts

 Upcoming Events

 HDMI Blog Posts

 Follow HDMI LA on X

Useful Links

 About HDMI Technology

 Becoming an Adopter

 Trademarks & Logos

Our Contacts

USA

 HDMI® Licensing Administrator, Inc.

 550 S. Winchester Blvd,
Suite 515

 San Jose, CA 95128, USA

 Contact HDMI LA

2026 © All Rights Reserved.

 Privacy Policy

 |

 Terms of Use

 |

 Login 

 The terms HDMI, HDMI High-Definition Multimedia Interface, HDMI Trade Dress and the HDMI Logos are trademarks or registered trademarks of HDMI Licensing Administrator, Inc.

Last updated:
