Ultra High Speed HDMI Cable - Bandwidth Up To 48Gbps

 If you are having problems seeing website images please make sure you update your browser to the latest version.

 ×

 Chinese

|

 Extranet Login

 Home

 Specifications

 Specifications Overview

 HDMI Specification 2.2

 HDMI 2.2 Overview

 Bandwidths and Resolutions

 Ultra96 HDMI Cable and Ultra High Speed HDMI Cable

 Ultra96 Feature Name

 Latency Indication Protocol (LIP)

 Dynamic HDR

 Source-Based Tone Mapping (SBTM)

 Enhanced Audio Return Channel (eARC)

 Enhanced Gaming Features

 Variable Refresh Rate (VRR)

 Auto Low Latency Mode (ALLM)

 Quick Frame Transport (QFT)

 Quick Media Switching (QMS)

 Cable Power

 HDMI Specification 1.4b

 Premium Cable

 HDMI Passive Adapter

 Adopters

 Becoming an Adopter

 New HDMI Adopters

 HDMI Founders

 HDMI Adopters

 Embedded Licensees

 Terminated Adopters

 Enforcement Search Tool

 About HDMI Forum

 Adopter-Only Extranet

 Resources

 Resources Overview

 HDMI Cables

 Testing Resources

 Testing Policies

 Test Equipment Manufacturers

 Authorized Test Centers (ATC)

 Licensing and Trademarks

 HDMI as a Brand

 Trademarks Guidelines

 Royalty Discounts

 HDMI Logos

 Brand Enforcement

 Enforcement Search Tool

 Report an Infringer 

 Approved Connectors

 Press Events Social

 Press Releases

 Announcements

 Events & Plugfests

 HDMI Blog Posts

 Tweets @HDMI Licensing

 Press Resources

 Archives

 Press Releases

 Announcements

 Blogs

ULTRA HDMI CABLES

Looking for a high speed HDMI cable? ✓ Click here to learn about high speed vs ultra high speed HDMI cable specifications & certification program compliance!

Ultra96 HDMI® Cable and Ultra High Speed HDMI® Cable

 The HDMI 2.2 Specification introduced the latest cable – the Ultra96 HDMI Cable - that supports up to 96Gbps bandwidth. It complies with stringent specifications designed to ensure support for all HDMI 2.2 features and applications including uncompressed full chroma formats such as 8K@60/4:4:4 and 4K@240/4:4:4 at 10-bit and 12-bit color. 

 The Ultra High Speed HDMI Cable was introduced in the HDMI 2.1 Specification and entered the market in 2020. It is applicable for system configurations supporting up to 48Gbps maximum bandwidth.

 Both the Ultra96 HDMI Cable and Ultra High Speed HDMI Cable are part of the Ultra HDMI Cable Certification Program. It is a mandatory certification program and ensures high-quality tested, certified and compliant cables reach the market. Both cables are also required to be tested and certified to ensure low EMI to reduce the possibility of interference with wireless networks, streaming media players, Bluetooth devices and mobile phones

 All Ultra96 HDMI Cable models and Ultra High Speed HDMI Cable models must pass certification testing at an HDMI Forum Authorized Testing Center (Forum ATC). Once certified, cables will be required to affix an Ultra96 HDMI Cable or Ultra High Speed HDMI Cable Certification Label to each package or unit of sale enabling consumers to verify the certification status of the product.

 How to identify Ultra HDMI Cables

 To identify the cable, make sure the packaging displays the required Ultra96 HDMI Cable or Ultra High Speed HDMI Cable Certification Label shown above. Please note the labels include the official Cable Name Logos printed on them. The names are also required to appear on the outer cable jackets themselves. To verify the cable model has been tested and certified in compliance with the HDMI 2.2 Specification, the labels can be scanned by standard QR code apps.

Shopping for the HDMI Cables Just Got Easier

Shopping for HDMI® Cables can be confusing. Resellers may use a variety of marketing terms and may not use the official HDMI Cable name designations, and many websites may recommend cables only based on receiving affiliate payments. And worst of all – some cables are counterfeits.

The Verification Banners are an optional add-on to the existing HDMI Cable Certification Program. The website banners enable consumers to verify the certification status of cables while shopping on manufacturer and reseller websites. The Verification Banners can be either clicked or scanned, displaying the brand name, model number and length - the same as when scanning the physical Certification Labels affixed to the cable packaging.

For more information click here

 Continuous Auditing Ensures Continuous Compliance and Performance

 In order to ensure an Ultra96 HDMI Cable and Ultra High Speed HDMI Cable stay in compliance to the specification over its product life, we purchase cables in stores and online marketplaces and send them in for testing to Forum ATCs. If a cable fails, the adopter has a chance to correct manufacturing issues or else no further certification labels can be ordered for that cable. However, if a cable passes, the adopter receives a letter confirming it is has passed the compliance audit and the label’s scan result also confirms the audit pass. This enables resellers and consumers to confirm continuous compliance.

 Supporting graphics, photos, and presentations are available for download and reproduction. Please attribute content you reproduce to HDMI Licensing Administrator, Inc.

 For information on how to order Certification Labels please email us.

(FAQ)

 Ultra High Speed HDMI, Ultra96 HDMI, the Ultra High Speed HDMI cable certification program, HDMI Ultra96, the HDMI Ultra High Speed certification label, the Ultra High Speed HDMI cable logo, and the HDMI Ultra96 cable logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of HDMI Licensing Administrator, Inc. or its related entities. 

HDMI® Licensing Administrator, Inc. (HDMI LA) is the agent appointed by the HDMI Forum to license Version 2.2 of the HDMI Specification and is the agent appointed by the HDMI Founders to license earlier HDMI Specifications.

Latest Posts

 Upcoming Events

 HDMI Blog Posts

 Follow HDMI LA on X

Useful Links

 About HDMI Technology

 Becoming an Adopter

 Trademarks & Logos

Our Contacts

USA

 HDMI® Licensing Administrator, Inc.

 550 S. Winchester Blvd,
Suite 515

 San Jose, CA 95128, USA

 Contact HDMI LA

2026 © All Rights Reserved.

 Privacy Policy

 |

 Terms of Use

 |

 Login 

 The terms HDMI, HDMI High-Definition Multimedia Interface, HDMI Trade Dress and the HDMI Logos are trademarks or registered trademarks of HDMI Licensing Administrator, Inc.

Last updated:
