Intel Introduces Thunderbolt 5 Connectivity
Standard
The industry-leading connectivity solution will
provide up to three times more bandwidth
compared with Thunderbolt 4.
News
September 12, 2023
Contact Intel PR
Follow Intel Newsroom on
social:
author-image
By
More Client Computing
News
 
What’s New: Today, Intel announced Thunderbolt™
5 – the next generation of Thunderbolt – and
demonstrated a prototype laptop and
dock. Thunderbolt 5 promises to deliver significant
improvements in connectivity speed and
bandwidth benefits for computer users.
Intel Newsroom 
Intel Introduces Thunderbolt 5 Standard
  
logo -
Return
to the
home
page
Skip To Main Content

–Jason Ziller, general manager of the Client
Connectivity Division at Intel
“Thunderbolt 5 will provide industry-leading
performance and capability for connecting
computers to monitors, docks, storage and
more. Intel is excited to continue our
tradition of leadership for wired connectivity
solutions. Thunderbolt is now the
mainstream port for connectivity on mobile
PCs, and delivering the next generation of
performance with Thunderbolt 5 will provide
even more capability for the most
demanding users.”
What It Does: Thunderbolt 5 will deliver 80
gigabits per second (Gbps) of bi-directional
bandwidth, and with Bandwidth Boost it will
provide up to 120 Gbps for the best display
experience. These improvements will provide up to
three times more bandwidth than the best existing
connectivity solution, providing outstanding
display and data connections. Thunderbolt 5 will
meet the high bandwidth needs of content
creators and gamers. Built on industry standards –
including USB4 V2 – Thunderbolt 5 will be broadly
compatible with previous versions of Thunderbolt
and USB.  
Why It Matters: Bandwidth needs of content
creators, gamers and professionals are increasing
significantly. These users want high-resolution
displays and low-latency visuals while working
with increasingly larger video and data files.
Thunderbolt 5 has been designed to massively
improve connectivity speed and bandwidth to
ensure modern PC users can enjoy the highestquality visuals and immersive experiences for
years to come. 
“Microsoft is excited to closely collaborate with
Intel to bring the latest USB4 standard to Windows
customers," said Ian LeGrow, corporate vice
president of Core OS product management at
Microsoft Corp. "Thunderbolt 5 is fully USB
80Gbps standard compliant to support the next
generation of high-performance displays, storage
and connectivity.”
Skip To Main Content

Thunderbolt 5 builds upon Thunderbolt 4 in
several ways, including:
 
Two times the total bi-directional bandwidth;
Bandwidth Boost provides up to three times
the throughput for video-intensive usage, up
to 120 Gbps.
Double the PCI Express data throughput for
faster storage and external graphics.
Built on industry standards including USB4
V2, DisplayPort 2.1 and PCI Express Gen 4;
fully compatible with previous versions.
Double the bandwidth of Thunderbolt
Networking for high-speed PC-to-PC
connections.
Utilizes a new signaling technology, PAM-3, to
deliver these significant increases in
performance with today’s printed circuit
boards, connectors and passive cables up to 1
meter.
 
About Thunderbolt in the PC Market:
Thunderbolt products have become mainstream in
the PC marketplace, with leading PC accessory
vendors worldwide adopting the standard to reach
hundreds of millions of PC users active today.
Thunderbolt 5 will build on this extensive base and
continue to deliver on the vision of one USB-C port
Thunderbolt 5 has been designed to massively improve connectivity speed
and bandwidth to ensure modern PC users can enjoy the highest-quality
visuals and immersive experiences for years to come. (Credit: Intel
Corporation)
Thunderbolt 5 will deliver 80 gigabits per second (Gbps) of bi-directional
bandwidth, and with Bandwidth Boost it will provide up to 120 Gbps for the
best display experience. These improvements will provide up to three times
more bandwidth than the best existing connectivity solution, providing
outstanding display and data connections. Thunderbolt 5 will meet the high
bandwidth needs of content creators and gamers.  (Credit: Intel Corporation)
Skip To Main Content

and cable that can do it all – simplifying the PC
experience for users around the globe while still
providing the highest quality and performance
possible. 
The announcement of Thunderbolt 5 is another
milestone in Intel’s long history of leading the
industry in input/output (I/O) innovation. Intel
works closely with PC, accessory and cable
partners to deliver the most advanced and
complete wired connectivity solutions through
dedicated enabling and testing programs.
All Thunderbolt products undergo stringent
certification testing to ensure the best wired
connection solution performance for the PC
industry. Products that pass this testing use the
Thunderbolt brand royalty-free. That’s why
Thunderbolt has become a globally recognized
indicator of the best wired connectivity solutions
for PCs and accessories.
What’s Next: Computers and accessories based on
Intel's Thunderbolt 5 controller, code-named
Barlow Ridge, are expected to be available starting
in 2024.
More Context: Intel Thunderbolt Technology
 |
Engineered for Intel® Evo™ Accessory Program
 | Thunderbolt 5:
The Next Generation -- The Best Solution for
Creators and Gamers
(Media Deck)
Tags
Client Computing
About Intel
Intel (Nasdaq: INTC) is an industry leader, creating world-changing technology that enables global
progress and enriches lives. Inspired by Moore’s Law, we continuously work to advance the design
and manufacturing of semiconductors to help address our customers’ greatest challenges. By
Skip To Main Content

embedding intelligence in the cloud, network, edge and every kind of computing device, we unleash
the potential of data to transform business and society for the better. To learn more about Intel’s
innovations, go to newsroom.intel.com
 and intel.com
.
© Intel Corporation. Intel, the Intel logo and other Intel marks are trademarks of Intel Corporation or
its subsidiaries. Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others.
Company Overview
Contact Intel
Newsroom
Investors
Careers
Corporate Responsibility
Diversity & Inclusion
Public Policy




© Intel Corporation
Terms of Use 
*Trademarks 
Cookies 
Privacy 
Supply Chain Transparency 
Site Map 
Recycling 
Intel technologies may require enabled hardware, software or service activation. // No product or component can be absolutely
secure. // Your costs and results may vary. // Performance varies by use, configuration and other factors. // See our complete legal
Notices and Disclaimers
. // Intel is committed to respecting human rights and avoiding causing or contributing to adverse
impacts on human rights. See Intel’s Global Human Rights Principles
. Intel’s
products and software are intended only to be used in applications that do not cause or contribute to adverse impacts on human
rights.
Skip To Main Content

 
