Fuente: https://computationstructures.org/notes/isas/notes.html (MIT 6.004 Computation Structures, cap. 14, Steve Ward) · leída 06-10-2026
Instruction Set Architectures
lectures
videos
worksheets
notes
labs
Contents
Preliminaries
1. About this course
2. Engineering Abstraction
Digital Circuits
3. Information
4. Circuits
5. The Digital Abstraction
6. CMOS
7. Combinational Logic
8. Sequential Logic
9. Finite State Machines
10. Synchronization and Arbitration
11. Performance Measures
12. Design Tradeoffs
Programmable Architectures
13. Models of Computation
14. Instruction Set Architectures
15. Assembly Language
16. Stacks and Procedures
17. Compiled Languages
18. Processor Implementation
19. Memory Systems
20. Pipelined Processors
Computer Systems
21. Virtual Memory
22. Virtualizing the Processor
23. Devices & Interrupts
24. System-level Communication
25. Concurrency & Synchronization
26. Parallel Processing
27. Future of Computing
Authored by Steve Ward
Instruction Set Architectures
14.  Instruction Set Architectures
In this Chapter, we begin the transition of our focus from the engineering
of digital systems in general to the engineering of contemporary general
purpose computers, the practical embodiment of the universal Turing
machines of
Section 13.4
.
The universal TM was intended as a conceptual tool -- a thought experiment
rather than a proposal for a practical implementation.  In practical terms,
it suffers from at least three difficulties:
Infinite hardware:
an infinite tape as its main
storage resource.
Performance limitations:
including bit-serial computations, long access times for
distant memory locations on the tape.
Programming model:
An unconstrained string of 1s and 0s on a tape
provide a poor programming interface for building and
maintaining large, modular software systems.
While the first two of these issues are fairly obvious, the last is
a bit more subtle.
Our desire to structure programs to reflect structure of a problem --
for example, to be able to simply construct a program that computes
$f(g(x))$ from two programs that compute $f(x)$ and $g(x)$ respectively --
requires some discipline in the design of the programming interface
itself.
Steps toward a General Purpose Computer
14.1.  Steps toward a General Purpose Computer
We naturally tend to view algorithms for practical computations as sequences of
operations: each algorithm is a recipe outlining a series of sequential steps
to be followed.
There may of course be conditionals and loops, as shown in the
sample program to the right; but the code describes finite
sequence of operations such as $a \leftarrow a \cdot b$ replacing
the value of some variable $a$ with the product of the values $b$ and $c$.
This C program computes $N!$ using
a loop that is executed as the variable $b$
is counted down from $N$ to $0$, accumulating
in $a$ the product of all nonzero values of $b$ along the way.
Datapath vs. Control Circuitry
14.1.1.  Datapath vs. Control Circuitry
We might express the logic that orders the exection of the steps
in this program execution as an FSM like that on the left.  A
starting state initializes the $a$ and $b$ variable values, after
which the loop state is executed so long as $b \neq 0$.
At each looping step, $a$ is replaced by a new $a \cdot b$ product
and $b$ is counted down, escaping the loop when $b = 0$.
Once completed, our FSM halts with the answer -- $F!$ -- in $a$.
To complete the construction of a factorial computer, we need
to augment this FSM with the circuit for a
datapath
,
controlled by our FSM, that implements the operations to be
performed at each step.
The datapath might contain two registers to hold values of $a$ and $b$,
allong with operators that perform multiplication and decrementing
required by our algorithm.
Note that we have chosen to represent $a$, $b$, and $N$ as 32-bit
unsigned binary values; hence the widths of data lines within our
data path are 32 bits.
Our data path uses two 3-way multiplexors to select, on each
clock cycle, inputs for the $a$ and $b$ registers.
The select
inputs to these multiplexors we view as control signal inputs to
the datapath: inputs, generated by our separate control FSM,
that control the operations and flow of data around the data
path diagram.
The control FSM itself, shown to the right, is a simple clocked 3-state FSM
whose state transition diagram is shown above.
It has as its single input
the 1-bit $z$ value from the data path indicating whether the contents of
$b$ are zero.
The ouputs of the FSM are the control signals required by
the data path,
viz.
the select inputs for the two multiplexors.
Logic for the control FSM, derived from the state transition diagram, is
shown to the left.
The decomposition of a system into control and data path subsystems
is a common technique for structuring complex digital systems, and
one that we will follow in the processor design of
Chapter 18
.
Generalizing Datapath Design
14.1.2.  Generalizing Datapath Design
The ad-hoc datapaths sketched in the above example could be generalized
to allow a modestly wider range of computations to be implemented by modifying
the logic of the control FSM.
Consider for example the data path to the left, offering a
set of four registers (labeled $R10$ through $R3$) and repertoire
of four possible operations (sum, difference, product, and bitwise NAND).
During each clock cycle, two
source
operands are selected from among the
contents of the four registers via $a_{SEL}$ and $b_{SEL}$,
and one the output of one of the four
operators is selected by the $OP_{SEL}$ control signal.
The result of the selected operation can optionally be routed to one
destination
regiser selected by the $W_{SEL}$ signal.
The single input to the control FSM is the result of an equality
test between the contents of the two selected source registers.
This enhanced data path design can be used to compute factorial
as well as a number of other interesting functions.  Of course, further
enhancements are possible: a greater number of registers may be offered,
as well as a larger repertoire of operations.
Indeed, early multi-purpose machines similar to this design were
constructed and used during the 1940s.
Their programming typically involved setting myriad switches,
establishing the logic of their FSM controller.
von Neumann Architecture
14.2.  von Neumann Architecture
The multi-purpose architectures of the 1940s fail the test for
Turing universality of
Section 13.4.1
, for at least
two simple reasons:
A finite bound on the size of their control logic, hence
on the complexity of the "program" to be executed;
A finite bound on the amount of data that can be stored
during the course of their computation.
Both of these finiteness limitations are avoided by the infinite
tape of the universal Turing machine, whose use for both program
and data allows the two issues to be resolved by a single infinite
resource.
In 1945, John von Neumann
articulated a plan
for building
general-purpose computers that has become known as the
von Neumann architecture
and remains the rough
blueprint for general purpose computers to this day.
Major components of the von Neumann architecture include
a
Central Processing Unit
or
CPU
,
comprising logic that performs actual computation;
a
Main Memory
used to store both data and
coded instructions that constitute a
program
for processing that data; and
an
Input/Output
component for communicating
inputs and results with the outside world.
This plan may be loosely viewed as a pragmatic adaptation of the
Universal Turing Machine.
Main memory serves the function of the Turing machine's infinite
tape, storing both programs (coded as sequences of instructions)
and data.
Although the size of main memory is finite, its size is viewed
as a parameter of the implementation: in theory, it can be
expanded to whatever finite size is required by the current
computation.
As noted in
Section 13.2.1
, such parameterization
offers a practical alternative to making memory infinite.
The CPU performs roughly the function of the FSM of a Turing
machine, reading instructions from main memory and executing
them, accessing data from memory in the process.
The I/O provision of the von Neumann architecture an embellishment
over the starkly minimalist approach to I/O used by Turing machines,
which requires the infinite tape to double as the sole I/O device.
The von Neumann plan anticipates dedicated I/O devices such as
keyboards, displays, and bulk storage.
The Stored-Program Computer
14.2.1.  The Stored-Program Computer
The use of a single memory subsystem to store both programs and data, inspired
by the tape of the Universal Turing Machine, constitutes a major difference between
von Neumann's proposal and prior
special-purpose
computers whose
computational function was wired into their circuitry.
The von Neumann machine uses a single main memory, capable of holding a finite number
of $W$-bit
words
of data, where the
word size
$W$ is a parameter
of the architecture while the total main memory size is a parameter of the implementation.
For example the IBM 360 (an influential architecture introduced in the 1960s)
dictated a 32-bit word size and a specific instruction set,
shared by all machines of the family.
However, specific IBM 360 computers might have memory sizes
varying from thousands to millions of words, depending on the
budget and requirements of the customer.
It is conventional to identify each $W$-bit storage location in main memory
with a unique
address
, typically an integer ranging from 0 to the
total number of words of main memory.
We can thus view main memory as a table of binary values as shown to the right,
each of whose entries represents a location containing a word of data.
In modern computer architectures the the word size $W$, as well as the number
of bits in an address, are both typically powers of two.
Often they are the same: thus an architecture whose word size is 32 bits
will typically restrict main memory addresses to 32 bits as well - an
architectural constraint that has been responsible for the obsolescence of
many once popular architectures.
Anatomy of a von Neumann Computer
14.2.2.  Anatomy of a von Neumann Computer
Although there are boundless ways to approach the implementation of a CPU,
a good choice is the separation of the design problem using roughly the
datapath
versus
control
partitioning of
shown to the right.
This diagram teases the datapath portion of the CPU, containing
logic for performing arithmetic and other operations on data,
apart from the control portion that interprets instructions fetched
from main memory and generates control signals for the datapath.
Each of these two CPU subsystems needs an interface to main memory:
the datapath needs to load and store data values, while the CPU
needs to fetch coded instructions to be executed.
CPU Datapath
14.2.2.1.  CPU Datapath
The datapath portion of the CPU typically includes some modest amount of
internal storage, often in the form of a set of general-purpose
registers
each capable of holding a word of data.
These registers serve as both sources and destinations of data for the
simple arithmetic and logical operations performed by each coded
instruction, using a datapath approach similar to that sketched on the right.
In this datapath, control signals (generated by the control subsystem
from a fetched instruction) include
asel
and
bsel
,
which select two source data words as input to the ALU; a
function
code to specify the operation to be performed by the ALU; and
dest
,
dictating a destination register into which the resulting value will be
loaded.
CPU Control
14.2.2.2.  CPU Control
The control circuitry of the CPU includes a modest amount
of storage, to maintain its state; typically this consists
primarily of a
program counter
or
PC
, a register capable of
holding an arbitrary main memory address.
The contents of the program counter specify the main memory address
containing the next coded instruction to be executed by the CPU.
Each instruction encodes the operations to be performed, as well
as the locations of
source
(input) and
destination
(output) operands, typically both registers within the datapath.
With certain exceptions, the CPU increments the contents of
the PC after the execution of each instruction, effecting the
execution of a sequence of instructions stored in consecutive
locations of main memory.
Control Fetch/Execute loop
The control of a typical von Neumann CPU roughly comprises the steps
of the flow diagram to the right, a
fetch/execute
loop
that fetches and executes a stream of single instructions in some prescribed
sequence.
The main memory location of the next instruction to be executed is
stored in the program counter, which is updated after every instruction
execution.
Because of their sequential execution of a single stream of instructions, such
CPUs are sometimes refered to as
single-sequence
machines, distinguishing
them from processors capable of executing multiple instructions concurrently.
Instruction Set Architecture as an Abstraction
14.3.  Instruction Set Architecture as an Abstraction
Before diving into the detailed specification of our example
stored-program instruction set, it is worth reflecting on the design
of an
instruction set architecture
or
ISA
as an engineering problem.
An instruction set architecture specifies how programs are to be encoded
for a family of computers sharing that architecture.
Once coded in a specific ISA, a program can generally be run on
various machines sharing that ISA provided sufficient memory and
I/O resources are available.
In this respect, an ISA is an important engineering abstraction:
it specifies an interface between hardware and software, and -- like
other engineering abstractions -- allows both technologies to evolve
independently.
The design of an instruction set is subject to a number of pressures:
Cost/performance.
It is clearly desireable that an ISA be cheap to implement and
execute programs quickly.
Cost/performance scaling.
A related, more subtle goal is that the ISA be consistent with
implementations over a wide range of the cost/performance spectrum;
that is, allowing specific programs to be run quickly on expensive
computers or more slowly on cheaper ones.
Model of computation.
During much of the history of general-purpose computing,
an ISA design often reflected a particular language family
or computation model: machines were designed around, say,
ALGOL or LISP.
Backward compatibility.
Common ISA desiderata include the requirement that a new
architecture be able to run
dusty deck
software
written for now-obsolescent machines.
Future compatibility.
Forward-looking ISAs are designed to anticipate new trends in
both hardware and software, often by providing an evolutionary
path for the ISA itself.
Each of these goals represents an engineering challenge; satisfying
each involves some cost, and different chapters of the evolving
computer engineering technology have led to successive trends in ISA
design.
Well-designed ISAs, like the IBM 360, have been spectacularly successful
as engineering abstractions by allowing the same software to be run on
many computers spanning a wide range of cost/performance tradeoffs and
decades of technology advances.
The isolation of software compatibility from technology-dependent
hardware details remains a major goal in the design of instruction sets.
In recent decades, however, it has been increasingly popular to downplay
ISA details as the key to this compatibility, viewing instead some
relatively machine-independent compiled language (such as C) as
the interface specification.
This view, popularized by
Patterson and Hennessey
as part of the
Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC)
movement, argues for starkly simplifying instruction sets
by eliminating ISA "baggage" whose performance impact on the
execution of real programs cannot be demonstrated by actual
or simulated execution.
The appeal of this RISC argument stems in part from the Turing universality
of the general purpose machines for which we are designing ISAs.
Each general purpose machine can perform the same computations,
which we can specify in a reasonably machine-independent way using
a higher-level language than machine instructions.
So why not use our body of existing software as benchmarks, and tune
the ISA design to maximize performance?
Such thinking has been a major driver for ISA evolution over recent
decades, resulting in steady, incremental progress in the design and
implementation of ISAs.
One plausible danger in this quantitative
hill climbing
approach to ISA evolution is that its basis on existing benchmarks
may miss architectural innovations that require a new, alternative
programming discipline: existing programs are optimized, to varying
extents, to existing ISAs.
It is possible that certain radical ISA improvements will require
radically different software structures to demonstrate their
advantages.
The Beta: An Example Instruction Set Architecture
14.4.  The Beta: An Example Instruction Set Architecture
To facilitate concrete examples throughout the remainder of this
course, we introduce a simple but representative instruction set
architecture called the
Beta
(a name inspired by the
Alpha
architecture of the now-defunct Digital Equipment
Corporation).
The Beta's ISA and programming model will be described in remaining
sections of this Chapter and
Chapter 16
; two different implementations will
be the subjects of
Chapter 18
and
Chapter 20
.
The Beta ISA is a representative 32-bit RISC design, and lends itself
to implementation strategies similar to that sketched in
Section 14.2.2
.
The programmer-visible state of the CPU is stored in a set of
general-purpose registers and a program counter.
Beta CPU State
14.4.1.  Beta CPU State
The programmer-visible state of a Beta CPU includes a 32-bit program counter (PC) and
a set of 32 general-purpose registers, each holding 32 bits.
We distinguish
programmer-visible
state from other storage
that may be hidden within a Beta implementation; remember that an
ISA is an engineering abstraction, designed to allow various different
implementation strategies.
The pool of general registers are intended to be used for various
purposes dictated by the running software, e.g. to hold data
relevent to the computation currently being performed.
We number them
consecutively from $0$ through $31$, and refer to them in text and
programs as $r0$ through $r31$.
Register $r31$ is a special case
whose contents are always a 32-bit
word of zeros.  This special case serves as a ready source of
the constant zero as well as a destination for data to be discarded.
The remaining registers, $r0$ through $r30$ are functionally
identical from a hardware standpoint,
although shortly we will establish
software conventions for the use of certain of them.
Byte Addressing
14.4.2.  Byte Addressing
The main memory of the Beta consists of an implementation-dependent
number of 32-bit locations as described in
Section 14.2.1
, with one important
additional complication:
a unique address is assigned to each
8-bit byte
in
memory, rather than to each 32-bit word.
This
byte addressing
scheme was introduced in the 1960s
in the IBM 360 ISA, and remains popular among current architectures.
As a consequence of byte addressing, the main memory addresses of
consecutive words differ by four rather than by one, since there are
four 8-bit bytes in each 32-bit word.
Squandering addresses in this way affords the option of addressing
individual bytes within a word, say to deal conveniently with character
strings stored as sequences of 8-bit character codes.
While we will not implement byte-level addressing in our Beta hardware,
some machines (like the IBM 360) have done so.
Endian Battles
14.4.2.1.  Endian Battles
The advent of byte addressing stimulated a famous and costly battle
within the computer industry, dubbed the
Endian
battle in a
tongue-in-cheek article by Danny Cohen
.
The issue arises on machines that allow both individual bytes and
32-bit words to be addressed within the same memory.
The 32-bit word stored at location 0 comprises four bytes, whose
addresses are 0, 1, 2, and 3; but which portion of the 32-bit word
addressed as byte 0?
There are two obvious answers to this question: byte 0 is the
high-order
byte of the 32-bit word, or its the
low
-order
byte.
Although in retrospect the industry could have done fine using
either convention, manufacturers split quite evenly between the
two options:
DEC and Intel, for example, used the
little endian
(byte 0 is low order) convention,
while IBM and Motorola chose the opposite
big endian
byte order
(until IBM chose to use Intel processors in its PC product line).
This lack of standardization of byte ordering extends
beyond ISA design to representation of multi-byte data in shared
data structures and network communications, complicating interface
specifications and communication.
While proponents of each byte ordering convention
once defended their choice with religious zeal, it is
generally recognized today that, aside from backwards compatibility
issues, the advantages of either choice are outweighed by
the costs of inconsistency among the industry.
Notation: Register Transfer Language
14.5.  Notation: Register Transfer Language
In order to describe sequences of computation steps in a relatively ISA-independent
way, e.g. for documenting the semantics of individual instructions,
we use an informal
register transfer language
(RTL).
R0 ← Mem[0x100]
tmp ← R0 + 3
Mem[104] ← tmp | 0x7
The sample RTL shown to the left specifies a sequence of computational steps,
one corresponding to each line of the pseudocode.  Each step involves an
transfer of a value specified by the expression to the right of the
←
operator to a destination specified by the expression to
the left of the
←
.
Source expressions may involve constants, main memory locations (designated
in the form
Mem[
address
]
,
or register names like
R0
or
PC
.  Destinations may be
variable names, memory locations, or registers.
Programming Conventions: Storage Use
14.6.  Programming Conventions: Storage Use
The design of an instruction set architecture reflects, to a great extent,
the set of programming conventions it is intended to support.  Modern programming
involves a basic set of common constructs such as variables, expressions,
procedures, and loops that need to be supported efficiently.
int x, y;
y = x * 37;
Consider, for example, the 2-line snipped of C code on the right.
The first line declares two variables,
x
and
y
;
the second line assigns a new value to
y
computed from
the current value of
x
.
Like most contemporary computer systems, we choose a systematic
strategy for representation of variables and the evaluation of
expressions involving them.  In particular:
For every variable, we assign a location in main memory to hold
a representation of its current value.
Instructions operate on operands in general registers,
which are used to hold for short-term copies of variable
and other temporary values.
Computations involving variables requires (1) loading the variable
values from main memory into registers, (2) performing the computation
using values in registers, and then (3) storing results back into
the main memory locations assigned to effected variables.
Following this model, the declaration of the variables
x
and
y
in the snippet of C code above would cause each to be
assigned a main memory address, perhaps at hex addresses
0x1008 and 0x100C in a region of memory reserved for
variable storage.
Note that each variable is assigned a full four byte (32-bit)
storage location, since our chosen run time representation of
an integer variable requires 32 bits.
Given byte addressing, this implies that addresses of such
variables stored in consecutive memory locations differ by
four.
In order to effect the assignment statement
y = x * 37;
of our C code snippet, we need to
(1) load the value of
x
into a register, (2) multiply it
by 37, and (3) store the result into the main memory location
assigned to
y
.
y=x*37
steps">
R0 ← Mem[0x1008]
R0 ← R0 * 37
Mem[100C] ← R0
Choosing arbitrarily general register 0 from the pool
of registers available in our datapath for temporary
use, we can effect the three required steps as shown
in the RTL to the right.  A remaining task is to specify
how operations like the three steps in the given RTL can
be encoded as Beta instructions.
Instruction Coding
14.7.  Instruction Coding
A major portion of an Instruction Set Architecture specification
deals with the repertoire of instructions provided by compliant
machines, and details of their encoding as binary contents of
locations in main memory.
An understanding of the representation of instructions and their
interpretation by the machine constitutes the
programming model
presented by the machine: a
specification of the
machine language
that constitutes
the most basic hardware/software interface presented by that
machine.
Approaches to coding of machine instructions are subject to the engineering
pressures mentioned in
Section 14.3
,
and have evolved with hardware and software technologies over the history
of the von Neumann architecture.
Aspects of this evolution include
Complexity:
Certain historically successful instruction sets --
including the IBM 360 and DEC VAX --
offer a rich repertoire of high-level instructions to
perform relatively complex computations within a single
instruction.  As an example, the VAX has a single instruction
whose execution evaluates an arbitrary single-variable polynomial
for a given value of its variable.
Such complex instruction sets -- derisively called
CISC
in
contrast to the simpler RISC approach popularized in the 1980s --
typically demanded a simpler machine language (called
microcode
)
hidden within the hardware that interprets the complex machine language
advertised by the ISA.
RISC ISAs, like the Beta, offer a limited set of basic operations as
single instructions, depending on sequences of such instructions
to perform more complex computations.
Instruction size:
A related issue is the number of bits used to encode a single
instruction.  Many CISC ISAs have variable-length instructions,
allowing simple operations to be performed by short instructions
(e.g. one or 2 bytes of memory) intermixed with longer instructions
encoding elaborate computations.
While this feature offers flexibility to encode a wide variety
of operations as single instructions, it complicates instruction
fetch and decoding, making certain performance improvements
(such as the
pipelined execution
of
Chapter 20
) impractical.
The Beta ISA takes the typical RISC route of using a single 32-bit
word to encode each instruction.
Access to main memory:
Some ISAs support enconding of single instructions that perform
operations (like addition) of operands stored in main memory,
which requires somehow encoding their main memory locations
within the instruction itself.
Others, like the Beta, restrict such operations to operands in
CPU registers, and provide separate instructions to move data
between registers and main memory.
Access to constants:
Common computations often involve constants: you need $\pi$ to
compute the area of a circle from its diameter, and 6 to compute
to compute the number of ounces in a sixpack.
Given that an ISA needs the ability to access the value of variables
stored in main memory, constants might simply be implemented as variables
that are initialized to the appropriate value and never changed.
But this approach involves time and program size costs for every
use of a constant; consequently, instruction sets commonly provide
a simple way of embedding short
instruction-stream constants
directly in certain
instructions to avoid the overhead of additional memory accesses.
The Beta provides instructions containing short (16-bit) constants.
There are many other such tensions between ISA design choices and
technology -- both software and hardware -- that
surface as we consider implementation strategies.
Beta Instructions
14.8.  Beta Instructions
As suggested by the previous sections, the Beta ISA offers three
general classes of instructions:
Operate class
instructions:
encode an ALU operation to be performed on operands held in general registers within
the CPU.
Memory access
instructions:
Load CPU registers from and store registers to locations within main memory.
Flow control
instructions:
By default, the Beta program counter is incremented (by 4, due to byte addressing)
after each instruction is fetched; hence its default operation is to execute
a sequence of instructions stored at successively increasing
word
addresses in main memory.
The
flow control
insructions allow this sequential execution
default to be varied; they change, perhaps conditionally,
the contents of the program counter
and hence the next instruction to be executed.
They provide for programmed loops, branches, conditional execution,
and procedure calls.
All Beta instructions are encoded as 32-bit words.
Each instruction is encoded in one of two similar formats, shown to the right;
in each case, the 32 bits of the instruction comprise four shorter fields,
each specifying an independent parameter of the instruction.  The fields are
OPCODE:
bits 26 through 31 of every Beta instruction.
The value stored in this 6-bit field dictates what operation is
encoded by the instruction, including which of the three instruction
classes it represents and which of the two formats are used for the
remaining bits of the instruction.
Rc:
bits 21-25 of every Beta instruction.
This 5-bit field encodes the "name" of a register (meaning a number
from 0 through 31 identifying one of the 32 CPU registers).
It is used to encode a
destination
register for an operation,
i.e., which register is to receive the result computed by that instruction.
Ra:
bits 16-20 of every Beta instruction.
This 5-bit field encodes another register, typically the register
containing a
source
operand to be used as an input to the
operation performed by the instruction.
Rb:
bits 11-15 of Beta instructions using the
first
instruction format.
This 5-bit field encodes another register, typically containing
a second source operand.
literal:
bits 0-15 of Beta instructions using the
second
instruction format.
This 16-bit field replaces the
Rb
field of the first format,
and holds a 16-bit instruction-stream constant.
Among other uses, it provides for operations (like
ADD
) in
which one operation is a small constant.
Encoding Binary Operations
14.8.1.  Encoding Binary Operations
The largest class of instructions in the Beta ISA are those that
perform actual computation: binary arithmetic, comparisons,
and bitwise logical operations on data stored in CPU registers.
In a typical Beta CPU, these operations are performed in an Arithmetic
Logic Unit (ALU) that takes two 32-bit binary operands as input, along
with a function code specifying the operation to be performed, and
produces a single 32-bit binary result.
Using our first instruction format, we can encode an operation
by choosing an appropriate opcode (which identifies the operation
as well as the instruction format), and filling the three
register-name fields to specify two source and one destination
registers.
ADD(R1,R2,R3)
encoding">
For example, a Beta instruction to add the contents of registers
R1 and R2 and place the result in R3 would be encoded as shown to
the right.  The leftmost field of the instruction, its 6-bit OPCODE,
is filled with a binary operation code assigned to the
ADD
operation.
The next $r_c$ field contains the 5-bit "name" (binary number 3) of
the
destination
register
R3
that is to be loaded with the
result of the operation.
The remaining two 5-bit fields, $r_a$ and $r_b$, indicate
source
registers
R1
and
R2
whose contents are the values
to be added.
Notation: Symbolic Instructions
14.8.2.  Notation: Symbolic Instructions
It is convenient to have a textual symbolic representation for machine
instructions; we use the notation
ADD(R1,R2,R3)
to designate
the Beta instruction encoded with the
ADD
opcode, and 1, 2 and
3 in the respective fields $r_c$, $r_a$, and $r_b$.
As elaborated in
Section 15.2
, this representation
is an example of the
assembly language
we will use as
the lowest-level programming interface to Beta processors.
We might document the semantics of the
ADD
instruction
by associating the symbolic representation of its encoding with
an RTL description of the resulting execution:
ADD(Ra,Rb,Rc):   Reg[Rc] ← Reg[Ra] + Reg[Rb]
Beta Operate Instructions
14.8.3.  Beta Operate Instructions
There is a modest repertoire of binary arithmetic and logical operations
that neatly fit the same pattern as the
ADD
instruction.
Each of these has a corresponding operate-class Beta instruction,
with its unique opcode.  These instructions are summarized below:
Operate Class:
OP(Ra,Rb,Rc)
:
Reg[Rc] ← Reg[Ra] op Reg[Rb]; PC ← PC+4
OP
Opcode
op
Description
ADD
100000
+
Twos-complement addition
SUB
100001
-
Twos-complement subtraction
MUL
100010
*
Twos-complement multiplication
DIV
100011
/
Twos-complement division
CMPEQ
100100
==
equals
CMPLT
100101
<
less than
CMPLE
100110
<=
less than or equals
AND
101000
&
bitwise AND
OR
101001
|
bitwise OR
XOR
101010
^
bitwise XOR
XNOR
101011
˜^
bitwise XNOR
SHL
101100
<<
Shift left
SHR
101101
>>
Shift right
SRA
101111
>>
Shift right arithmetic (signed)
In addtion to familiar arithmetic operations on binary integers,
the Beta provides bitwise logical operations on 32-bit binary words,
signed integer comparisons, and shifts.
This set of operations corresponds roughly to the operators available
in expressions in popular high-level languages like C and Python;
the
op
column of the table gives typical operator syntax
in these languages.
Note that any of the 32 Beta registers can be specified for any
of the operands of these instructions, including the special R31
whose contents are hard wired to the value zero.
This leads to some useful special cases; for example,
ADD(Rx, R31, Ry)
adds the (zero) contents
of R31 to
Rx
, storing the result in
Ry
.
It effectivly copies the value from
Rx
to
Ry
.
ADD(Rx, Ry, Rx)
increments the value in
Rx
by the value in
Ry
.  It is important to note that
the source operands get the values in the registers
prior
to the execution of the instruction, not (in this case) the
updated value being stored back into
Rx
.
ADD(Rx, Rx, Ry)
doubles the value in
Rx
,
storing the result in
Ry
.
ADD(Rx, Ry, R31)
computes the sum of its two source
operands, but stores the result in the always-zero
R31
--
effectively discarding the result.
This is an example of a no-operation (or
NOP
) instruction,
whose execution has no visible effect on the CPU state beyond
incrementing the PC.
32-bit Arithmetic and Overflow
14.8.3.1.  32-bit Arithmetic and Overflow
The Beta ISA includes the four basic arithmetic operations, each of
which takes 32-bit operands from the source registers and returns a
32-bit result in the destination register.
It is worth noting that the addition or subtraction of 32-bit values
may yield a 33-bit result, incapable of fitting into the 32-bit
destination register; these operations store the low-order 32 bits
of the sum, discarding the high-order bit.  We view arithmetic
operations whose results are truncated to the low-order 32 bits
as examples of
arithmetic overflow
, an error condition
that must be considered by software.  It is noteworthy that overflow
of an
ADD
operation occurs when both source operands have
the same sign (high-order bit) but the result has the opposite sign.
Similarly, the result of a 32-bit multiplication can return a 32-bit
result; the Beta
MUL
instruction returns only the low-order
32-bits of the product.
Again, the circumspect programmer is responsible for avoiding or
dealing with errors due to such overflow.
Arithmetic overflow can be managed in a variety of ways.  Among
these is using more sophisticated number representations, e.g.
fixed-size floating-point representations (which eliminates
many overflow possibilities at the cost of numeric precision)
or varible-length (or
bignum
) representations which
require more sophisticated storage management and arithmetic
implementations.
While such representations can be implemented in software on the
Beta, the instruction set provides direct support only for basic
32-bit arithmetic.
Comparisons and Boolean Values
14.8.3.2.  Comparisons and Boolean Values
Operate class instuctions on the Beta include three comparison
operations --
CMPEQ
,
CMPLT
, and
CMPLE
,
that operate on two signed binary source operands and return a
Boolean (true/false) result in the destination register.
The output of these instructions is a single bit in the low-order
position of the result:
true
is represented by a binary 1,
while
false
is represented by 0.
These Boolean results may be used in subsequent conditional branch
instructions to effect the flow of control, e.g. for implementing
conditional execution of blocks of code, loops, and recursion;
we'll see examples shortly.
Logical and Arithmetic Shifts
14.8.3.3.  Logical and Arithmetic Shifts
The logical
shift
operations of the
Beta,
SHL(Ra,Rb,Rc)
and
SHR(Ra,Rb,Rc)
produce a result in
Rc
which is the contents of
Ra
shifted left or right by a number of bit positions given by the
low-order 5 bits of
Rb
; vacated bit positions in the
result are filled with zero.
Such shifts have many uses -- among them, the multiplication or
rough division of binary integers by powers of two.
If
R1
contains a positive integer $N$ and
R2
contains 5, for example, executing
SHL(R1, R2, R3)
leaves
the value $2^5 \cdot N$ in
R3
.  Again, this operation is
subject to possible overflow, whence the result will be the low-order
32 bits of the product $2^5 \cdot N$.
Similarly, shifting a positive integer $N$
right
by 5 bits
using
SHR
yields the integer portion of $N / 2^5$.
If $N$ is a negative integer, however, the result will not
reflect this division by a power of two: zeros shifted into high
order bits will render a positive output word.
To support scaling of signed quantities by right shifting, the
Beta provides an additional instruction
SRA
which behaves
like
SHR
with the exception that vacated bit positions
are filled with the sign bit of the original
Ra
contents.
Operate Instructions with Constants
14.8.4.  Operate Instructions with Constants
To support operations involving constants, the Beta ISA supports
variants of each of the above instructions in which the second
source operand is a 16-bit signed constant embedded directly in
the instruction itself.
The symbolic names of these instuctions are the names of the
corresponding operate class instruction with an appended "C" --
indicating that the
Rb
field has been replaced by a
literal constant operand.
The format of these instructions allows only 16 bits for
the representation of the constant.
To support negative as well as positive embedded constants,
this 16-bit field is
sign-extended
to yield a signed
32-bit value which is used as the second source operand.
Sign extension simply involves replication of the sign bit of
the embedded constant -- bit 15 -- to synthesize the high-order
16 bits of the 32-bit source operand.
Operate Class with Constant:
OPC(Ra, C ,Rc)
:
Reg[Rc] ← Reg[Ra] op SEXT(C); PC ← PC+4
OPC
Opcode
op
Description
ADDC
110000
+
Twos-complement addition
SUBC
110001
-
Twos-complement subtraction
MULC
110010
*
Twos-complement multiplication
DIVC
110011
/
Twos-complement division
A
CMPEQC
110100
==
equals
CMPLTC
110101
<
less than
CMPLEC
110110
<=
less than or equals
ANDC
111000
&
bitwise AND
ORC
111001
|
bitwise OR
XORC
111010
^
bitwise XOR
XNORC
111011
˜^
bitwise XNOR
SHLC
111100
<<
Shift left
SHRC
111101
>>
Shift right
SRAC
111111
>>
Shift right arithmetic (signed)
Useful examples and special cases include:
ADDC(R31, C, Rx)
adds zero to the sign-extended literal and stores it in
Rx
;
it provides a convenient way to initialize the value in a register
to a small constant.
XORC(Rx, -1, Ry)
flips all 32 bits of the value in
Rx
, by XORing it with
a word of 32 1s.  This is a convenient way to compute the bitwise
complement of a binary word.
SHLC(Rx, 5, Ry)
multiplies the value in
Rx
by $2^5 = 32$, so long as overflow is avoided.
ANDC(Rx, 0xFFF, Ry)
zeros all but the low-order 12 bits
of
Rx
, using the 12-bit
mask
0xFFF
.
This is a useful step in extracting selected bits from a binary
word.
Flow Control Instructions
14.8.5.  Flow Control Instructions
Since by default the new value of the
PC
after execution of an
instruction is
PC+4
, by default the Beta executes sequences of
instructions stored at consecutively increasing word locations.
Flow control instructions allow us to vary this default by storing
alternative values into the PC.
The Beta has three such instructions: a simple unconditional
jump
instruction which allows an arbitary address to be computed and loaded
into the PC; and two
conditional branches
that allow such a
jump to happen only if a computed value is zero or nonzero.
As each of these instructions may load a new value into the PC,
the old value in the PC may be lost as a result of their execution.
While this information loss often causes no problems, the Beta
flow control instructions provide a mechanism for optionally preserving
the old PC value in a specified destination register.
We will find this mechanism useful when we discuss
procedure calls
in
Chapter 16
.
When saving the prior PC value is unnecessary, we simply specify
R31
as the destination register in jumps and branches.
Flow Control:
Jump: opcode 011011
JMP(Ra, Rc)
:
Reg[Rc] ← PC + 4;
PC ← Ra
Branch on Equal to zero: opcode 011100
BEQ(Ra, label ,Rc)
:
Reg[Rc] ← PC + 4;
if Reg[Ra] == 0 then PC ← PC + 4 + 4*SEXT(C)
else PC ← PC+4
Branch on Not Equal to zero: opcode 011101
BNE(Ra, label ,Rc)
:
Reg[Rc] ← PC + 4;
if Reg[Ra] != 0 then PC ← PC + 4 + 4*SEXT(C)
else PC ← PC+4
The
JMP
instruction is very simple; it uses neither the
Rb
nor the constant fields, so is compatible with both of the Beta instruction
formats.
The
BEQ
and
BNE
instructions, however, use the constant
field of the instruction to specify a
signed word offset
from the
current PC value as a
target address
for the branch.
Note carefully that, in each case, the constant
C
is sign extended
(to allow branches to lower as well as higher memory locations from the
current PC contents) and multiplied by 4 (to restrict the branch target
to
word
addresses, which differ by 4 bytes).
This computed offset is then applied to the
incremented
value
of the PC, viz.
PC+4
.
One important consequence of this approach to specifying branch target
addresses is that a branch instruction cannot branch to an
arbrary
location in main memory -- only to one within about $2^{15}$ word locations
on either side of the branch instruction itself.
This is rarely a problem, particularly in the small programs dealt with
in this course.
However, if a transfer to an arbitary main memory address is required,
a
JMP
instruction must be used rather than the shorter branches.
The computation of the value to be placed in the constant field of a
branch instruction is tedious, so our assembly language provides the
humane alternative of specifying a
label
-- effectively the
target address of the branch -- rather than the actual value to be
stored in the instruction.
We will see details of this support, as well as examples, shortly.
Some useful observations:
If the constent field of a branch instruction contains
zero
,
the branch target is the instruction immediately following the branch
instruction itself.
If the constent field of a branch instruction contains -1,
the branch target that branch instruction itself.
Such an instruction constitutes a "tight loop", whose only action
is to transfer control back to itself.
BEQ(R31, label, R31)
effects an
unconditional
branch since the contents of
R31
are always zero.
Although rarely necessary, Beta flow control instructions provide
a way for programs to access the value in the program counter as data.
For example, a branch instruction whose constant field contains 0 and
which specifies
R0
as the destination register
Rc
will have the effect of loading into
R0
the address of the
instruction
following
the branch.
Memory Access Instructions
14.8.6.  Memory Access Instructions
The most basic requirement for access to main memory are instructions
that can read the contents of a given main memory address into a register,
and write the contents of some register into a specified location in
main memory.
In such a minimalist approach, a register would be used to pass the
main memory address in read or write instructions.  That address
could be the result of some arbitrary computation, so the minimalist
approach is completely general.
However, most ISAs provide some address computation mechanism to
reduce the extra instructions needed for memory addressing.
The mechanism reflects, to a great extent, software conventions
for the organization of data in main memory.
Common memory access patterns that have different addressing
requirements include
Statically-allocated:
address is a
constant.
indirect addressing:
the address to be accessed
is stored in another program variable.
Array element:
an access
Array[i]
to one of a number
of elements stored in consecutive main memory locations.
In this case the address of the accessed location is the sum of
a base address and a computed offset.
Record element:
an access like
Employee.age
involving an address computed as a fixed offset
from a variable record address (a
pointer
to the record).
PC-relative
addressing, useful for access to constant
data local to the code being executed.
There are a number of additional patterns that might be added to this
list.  We could consider, for example, combinations of arbitrary
complexity such as
indirect array access
, where the
address of the desired location is stored in an array.
Many successful machines have provided hardware support for a
rich repertoire of memory
addressing modes
, providing
memory access instructions
that compute, for example, the address of an array element from
a base address and an offset.
The Beta memory access instructions
LD
and
ST
provide a representative
compromise: instructions for reading and writing a memory location
whose address is the sum of a variable component (passed in a register)
and a constant component (incorporated as an instruction-stream
constant).  Special cases of this pattern deal well with all of the
patterns in our list above except for
PC-relative
addressing, for which we provide a separate
load relative
LDR
instruction.
Memory Access:
Load from Memory: opcode 011000
LD(Ra, C ,Rc)
:
Reg[Rc] ← Reg[Rc ← Mem[Reg[Ra]+SEXT(C)];
PC ← PC+4
Store to Memory: opcode 011001
ST(Rc, C ,Ra)
:
Mem[Reg[Ra]+SEXT(C)] ← Ra;
PC ← PC+4
Load Relative: opcode 011111
LDR(label, Rc)
:
Reg[Rc] ← Mem[PC + 4 + 4*SEXT(C)];
PC ← PC+4
Note that the symbolic form
ST(Rc, C, Ra)
has its registers
in an unusual order.  This reflects an effort at consistency with our
convention that, in our symbolic representations of instructions, the
destination location is
last
.  In the case of
ST
,
Rc
is actually the
source
of data to be written
in a location determined by
C
and
Ra
.  The design
of
ST
with these roles for each register will become
better motivated in
Chapter 18
.
Note several useful special cases:
LD(Ra, 0, Rc)
or
ST(Rc, 0, Ra)
access the
location whose address is in
Ra
.
LD(R31, C, Rc)
or
ST(Rc, C, R31)
access the
location whose address C, so long as C fits within 15 bits.
This is useful for accessing fixed locations in low memory.
The
LDR
instruction uses the same addressing mechanism
as that used by the branch instructions.  In both cases, the
instructions exploit an address encoding economy that comes at
the cost of a limitation on their addressing range to locations
near the addressing instruction.
Most branches are to nearby locations, making the branch instructions
a viable alternative to the less convenient
JMP
for the
majority of control transfers.
Loading 32-bit constants from nearby locations is a common special
case of memory access, although (as we will see) PC-relative addressing
is less useful for writes or variable accesses.  Given the
provision for the PC-relative addressing used by branch instructions,
however, the addition of the
LDR
instruction comes at
low cost.
Opcode assignments
14.8.7.  Opcode assignments
The 6-bit Opcodes that uniquely identify each Beta instruction
are shown in the table below:
Although actual opcode assignments are generally uninteresting to the
programmer and
may be assigned arbitrarily, they are often grouped
by instruction type or on some other logical basis.
There may be implementation advantages to certain
features of the assignments; for example, the fact that
the functionally similar
BEQ
and
BNE
opcodes differ by a single bit may make it convenient
to share the mechanism that interprets and executes them.
Unused Opcodes
14.8.7.1.  Unused Opcodes
Note that many of the possible 6-bit opcodes are unspecified in the
table: they constitute
unused opcodes
(
UUO
s)
whose function has not been specified in the ISA.
The UUOs may be viewed as reserved for future expansion: subsequent
versions of the Beta ISA might assign opcodes, for example, to
floating-point operations or instructions for accessing individual
bytes of main memory.
Alternatively, the UUOs may serve to allow some degree of
implementation-specific customization of the instruction set.
A manufacturer of signal-processing equipment might, for example,
extend the Beta with application-specific instructions for a
custom processor used in her products.
Even users of off-the-shelf stock Beta processors may extend the
instruction set by software (via mechanism to be discussed shortly).
While these alternative perspectives regarding UUOs -- and others --
are legitimate, there are tensions among them.  To the extent that
the ISA establishes a
standard
for the Beta, use of
unspecified or functionally ambiguous aspects undermines the
guarantee that software written to that ISA will run on hardware
that implements the ISA.
A user who writes software for a customised Beta ISA forgoes
compatibility with existing Betas, although her software
might run alongside existing software on an extended Beta.
Two users building on mutually incompatibile ISA extensions
guarantee that their software will never run on the same
processor.
History has shown that careful thinking about major abstractions
like the design of an ISA is a worthwhile engineering investment.
An ISA that aspires to transcend several generations of hardware
technology, for example, needs to provide an evolutionary path
for the hardware/software interface.
An ISA designed to support multiple implementations reflecting
a variety of cost/performance tradeoffs might provide alternative
implementation approaches to certain functions.
For example, an ISA might specify floating-point instructions
that are implemented in (slow) software in cheap CPUs and in
(faster) hardware in higher-end processors.  Each processor
in this spectrum can execute the same software, albeit at
varying speeds and cost.
Handling UUOs
14.8.7.2.  Handling UUOs
Recognising that certain opcodes are unused in our ISA raises
a subtle question: should the ISA specifiy the behavior of the
Beta when it encounters an instruction containing one of these
illegal opcodes?  And if so, what behavior is desirable?
There are a number advantages to the careful handling of UUOs
(and other error conditions that may arise) and the complete
specification this handling in the ISA.
A key capability is the ability for an error to invoke a
software
handler
, whose execution somehow deals
with the error.
The handler might simply give a coherent error message.
More ambitious handlers might perform a
divide operation in software, masking the fact that the
current Beta does not provide hardware support for the
DIV
instruction.
Exception Handling
14.9.  Exception Handling
Handling of UUOs motivates the remaining aspect of our ISA
specification: dealing with various computational events
that are extraneous to the normal steps in instruction execution.
We use the term
exceptions
to describe this class of
events, which fall into three categories:
Faults
represent error conditions that arise
as a result of executing an instruction.  Examples include
illegal opcode
errors arising from attempts to execute
instructions having unimplemented opcodes,
out-of-bounds-access
faults resulting from access to a main memory
location beyond the range of addresses available on the machine, or a
divide-by-zero
fault resulting from a division by a
zero denominator.
Traps
are similar to faults, but are the intended consequence
of instruction execution.
For example, a UUO whose execution invokes a handler that emulates
an unsupported hardware instruction may provide a measure of software
compatibility at low cost.
External Interupts
are events generated by external stimuli,
such as input/output devices.
Examples include a
keyboard
interrupt that signals the fact
that a key has been struck, or a
network
interrupt that
signals the arrival of a packet of network traffic.
All three classes invoke the same exception handling mechanism, and we
will see detailed examples of each in the third module of this course.
For the present, we sketch the basic mechanism necessary to for their
support.
Invoking a handler
14.9.1.  Invoking a handler
The key mechanism required for processing exceptions is the ability
to specify, for each exception type, a
handler
to be run
when that exception occurs.
A handler is simply a Beta program, stored as a sequence of Beta
instructions in some region of main memory, whose execution is triggered
by the computational event associated with the exception.
Each type of exception interrupts the execution of the currently
running program, temporarily "borrowing" the CPU to run the handler
code to deal with the exception.
In the case of traps and external interrupts, the handler returns
control to the interrupted program, which continues executing from
the point at which it was interrupted.
The invocation of a handler simply requires loading the Beta's PC
with the starting address of that handler, and executing instructions
from there.
However, there are several closely related characteristics we require from our
mechanism for exception processing:
Information preserving:
The state of the interrupted program must be preserved (so it
can be restarted), and accessible to the handler code (for
error diagnosis or instruction set extension);
Transparency:
It must be possible to interrupt an arbitrary program, and
return to that program without effecting its subsequent
execution.  The interrupt is thus
invisible
to
the interrupted program.
We will place most of the burden of these requirements on the
exception handlers themselves: they must be carefully coded to
be information preserving and transparent.
However, our minimalist architectural support cannot lose
information in their invocation.
Since invoking an exception handler necessarily involves loading its
address into the PC, the prior contents of the PC -- critical state of
the interrupted program -- will be lost unless we take steps to
preserve it.
There are a variety of different approaches taken by contemporary
CPUs to preserve the state of interrupted programs, including the PC.
The approach taken by the beta simplifies its hardware complexity, at
the cost of one register from its pool of 32:
One of the Beta's general registers,
R30
, is dedicated
to use by exception processing.
We memorialize this dedication by renaming it
XP
, for
eXception Pointer
.
XP
is not to be used for ordinary programming, e.g.applications.
Each type of exception is assigned a unique address in main
memory for an
interrupt vector
, a single Beta instruction
that branches to the handler for that exception.
An exception of type $e$ is processed by the two step sequence:
XP ← PC+4
PC ←
$IVector_e$
where $IVector_e$ is the interrupt vector address assigned for
exceptions of type $e$.
To maintatin transparency, interrupt handlers must save all CPU state
(e.g. contents of registers) and restore it prior to returning
to the interrupted program.
Since the value in
XP
is the address of the instruction
following
the interrupted instruction, a handler for an
external interrupt will typically return to the interrupted program
via a sequence like
SUBC(XP, 4, XP)
JMP(XP)
Beta interrupt vectors are assigned low memory locations, starting at zero.
Location 0 is assigned to the
RESET
exception, which signals
the startup of the CPU (e.g., on power-on).
Location 4 is assigned to the
IllOp
exception, taken when an
instruction containing an unused opcode is encountered.
Other exception types, e.g. for I/O events, are assigned following
locations.
Kernel Mode
14.9.2.  Kernel Mode
In the Beta, interrupt handlers are part of the
operating system kernel
,
a body of code permanently installed in a region of main memory that
is a topic of the final module of this course.
Typically the operating system kernel is
priviledged
, in
that it may directly access I/O devices and other basic system
resources that unpriviledged programs, such as applications,
access only via requests to the operating system.
For this reason, it is common to maintain a bit of CPU state that
distinguishes whether the CPU is currently executing priviledged
OS code -- eg an interrupt handler -- or unpriviledged
user
code.
In the Beta we dedicate the high-order bit -- bit 31 --
of the PC as the
kernel mode
bit: it contains 1 while
executing code within the operating system kernel, or 0 while
executing ordinary applications.
We refer to these modes of CPU operation as
kernel
and
user
modes, respectively.
When a user mode program is interrupted by an exception, its
PC (with a high-order 0 indicating user mode) is copied to
XP, and the handler is entered with the kernel bit of the PC
set to 1
ensuring that the handler runs in kernel mode.
When the handler returns to the interrupted program via
a
JMP(XP)
instruction, the entire PC -- including
the K bit -- is restored from the value in XP.  This restores
the CPU to user mode to continue executing the program.
Reentrance
14.9.3.  Reentrance
Although some systems allow the execution of exception
handlers themselves to be interruped by exceptions, such
reentrant
handler execution presents some
new difficulties.
Since we have allocated the single register XP to hold
the address of the interrupted program, for example,
what happens if the handler is interrupted before it
is able to save XP elsewhere?
Such problems are solvable, but at some cost in complexity.
As a result, handler reentrance is often avoided rather
than being supported.
A simple way to avoid reentrant interrupts is to make the
processor only take exceptions while in user mode.
This requires that the operating system kernel be
carefully written, both to avoid errors (which may
not be properly handled) and to avoid depending on
trapped instructions for functional extensions.
The Beta follows this route.
Errors and traps are best avoided in kernel mode code, and
attention to external interrupt requests from I/O devices is
deferred until the CPU is running in user mode.
This implies that the Beta will turn a deaf ear to I/O devices
while in kernal mode, and must return occasionally to user
mode to process external interrupt requests.
The impact of these constraints on operating system structure
will be explored in the next module of this course.
Factorial in Software
14.10.  Factorial in Software
The Beta ISA introduced in later sections of this chapter
provide minimalist but representative support for contenporary
programming practices.  Subsequent chapters will provide many
substantive examples, illustrating typical software conventions
for application and operating system programming.
N:    (input value)
...
// Compute Fact(N), leave in R0:
Fact: ADDC(R31, 1, R0)  // R0
We close this chapter with a glimpse at a tiny fragment of assembly language
code, shown to the right, that performs the same Fact(N) computation
that we addressed with ad-hoc hardware in
Section 14.1
.
Although details of the assembly language will be the
subject of the next chapter, the astute reader will notice
that the little program contains a sequence of five symbolic
Beta instructions that have been discussed in this chapter,
each on a separate line.
The 32-bit binary translations of each symbolic instruction
are stored in five consecutive locations in the Beta's
main memory.
Comments in the code begin with
//
and extend to
the end of the line, and are ignored by the translation to
binary instructions.  Notations like
Fact:
and
loop:
are
tags
that establish symbolic names for the memory
address
containing the following instructions; thus
Fact
denotes the memory address containing the first
of the five instructions, and
loop
is the address of
the subsequent
MUL
instruction.  Another memory
location, bearing the tag
N:
, is reserved to hold
the input value $N$.
The instruction of the sequencer,
ADDC
,
initializes
R0
to 1 by computing the
sum of zero (always the contents of
R31
) and the constant 1.
The second loads
R1
with the input value stored in the
location tagged
N:
, via a load from the address computed
by adding zero to the symbolic address
N
of the tagged
location.  These steps roughly correspond to the initializations
performed in the
start
state of the FSM diagrammed in
.
The remaining three instructions correspond to the looping
state of that FSM, successively updating
R0
by a
new product while counting down the value in
R1
until it reaches zero.
The
BNE(R1, loop, R31)
is translated to an
appropriate branch instruction whose constant portion
is computed to make the target of the conditional branch
be the instruction bearing the tag
loop:
--
the
MUL
instruction.  In this case the constant
computed will be -3, branching backwards three instructions
from the location following the
BNE
.
The branch to
loop
is taken whenever the
value in
R1
is nonzero; once
R1
is counted down to zero, control will pass to the
following instruction with the computed value left
in
R0
.
References
14.11.  References
Beta ISA reference
Single-sheet Beta summary
,
a useful cheat-sheet to have around when working Beta-related problems.
Further Reading
14.12.  Further Reading
von Neumann, John,
First Draft Report on the EDVAC
(1945).
Incomplete draft by von Neumann detailing what became known as the
von Neumann
architecture.
Hennessy, John L., and Patterson, David A.,
Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach
, Fifth Edition,
Elsevier 1012.
Leading contemporary text on computer architecture, by the two best-known
proponents of the RISC movement.
Cohen, Danny,
"On Holy Wars and a Plea for Peace"
, 1980.
Copyright © 2015-2017 M.I.T. Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Your use of this site and materials is subject to our
terms of use
.