URL: https://nvmexpress.org/specifications/
Leído: 2026-10-05



 Specifications - NVM Express

 Skip to content

 About

 About

 Board of Directors

 Frequently Asked Questions

 Technology Ecosystem

 Contact us

 Membership

 Membership

 Join NVM Express

 Membership List

 NVM Express Working Groups

 Members Only

 Specifications

 Specifications

 Drivers

 Education

 Compliance

 Testing & Compliance

 Product Listings

 Product Submissions

 Trademark and Logo License

 News

 Media Coverage

 Press Releases

 Members in the News

 Events

 Blog

Specifications

NVMe Set of Specifications Overview

The NVM Express® (NVMe®) specifications define how host software communicates with non-volatile memory across multiple transports like PCI Express® (PCIe®), RDMA, TCP and more. It is the industry standard for solid state drives (SSDs) in all form factors (U.2, M.2, AIC, EDSFF). NVM Express is the non-profit consortium of tech industry leaders defining, managing and marketing NVMe technology. The latest versions in the NVMe set of specifications were released on August 4, 2026.

Guide to the NVM Express Specification Set

The NVMe 2.4 specifications consists of multiple documents, including the NVMe Base specification, Command Set specifications (e.g., Computational Programs Command Set Specification, NVM Command Set specification, SLM Command Set Specification, KV Command Set Specification, ZNS Command Set specification), Transport specifications (e.g., NVMe over PCIe Transport specification, NVMe over RDMA Transport specification and NVMe over TCP Transport specification), NVMe Boot specification, and the NVMe Management Interface specification.

The NVM Express Base (NVM Express Base) Specification defines a protocol for host software to communicate with non-volatile memory subsystems over a variety of memory-based transports and message-based transports.

The NVM Express Management Interface (NVMe-MI) Specification defines an optional management interface for all NVM Express Subsystems.

NVM Express I/O Command Set Specifications define data structures, features, log pages, commands, and status values that extend the NVM Express Base Specification. NVM Express Transport specifications define the binding of the NVMe protocol including controller properties to a specific transport.

The NVM Express Boot Specification (NVMe Boot) defines constructs and guidelines for booting from NVM Express interfaces.

Please note that the webpage includes obsolete specifications (i.e., the NVMe-oF Specification) as a historical reference.

Ratified Technical Proposals and Engineering Change Notices are available by specification.

View All Archived Specifications 

 About

 Membership

 Specifications

 Education

 Compliance

 News

 Events

 Blog

Newsletter Signup

Email

 Name

 First

 Last

CAPTCHA

 Submit 

Δ

 © 2026 NVM Express

