URL: https://www.wi-fi.org/news-events/newsroom/wi-fi-alliance-introduces-wi-fi-certified-wpa3-security
Leído: 2026-10-06

 Next generation Wi-Fi® security for personal and enterprise networks Austin, TX – June 25, 2018 
– Wi-Fi Alliance® introduces Wi-Fi CERTIFIED WPA3™, the next generation of Wi-Fi® security, 
bringing new capabilities to enhance Wi-Fi protections in personal and enterprise networks. 
Building on the widespread adoption of WPA2™ over more than a decade, WPA3™ adds new features 
to simplify Wi-Fi security, enable more robust authentication, and deliver increased cryptographic 
strength for highly sensitive data markets. As the Wi-Fi industry transitions to WPA3 security, 
WPA2 devices will continue to interoperate and provide recognized security. WPA3 security continues 
to support the market through two distinct modes of operation: WPA3-Personal and WPA3-Enterprise. 
All WPA3 networks use the latest security methods, disallow outdated legacy protocols, and require 
use of Protected Management Frames (PMF) to maintain resiliency of mission critical networks. Key 
capabilities of WPA3 include: WPA3-Personal: more resilient, password-based authentication even 
when users choose passwords that fall short of typical complexity recommendations. WPA3 leverages 
Simultaneous Authentication of Equals (SAE), a secure key establishment protocol between devices, 
to provide stronger protections for users against password guessing attempts by third parties. 
WPA3-Enterprise: offers the equivalent of 192-bit cryptographic strength, providing additional 
protections for networks transmitting sensitive data, such as government or finance. The 192-bit 
security suite ensures a consistent combination of cryptographic tools are deployed across WPA3 
networks. Wi-Fi Alliance introduced enhancements and new features earlier this year for Wi-Fi 
Protected Access®, the essential family of Wi-Fi CERTIFIED™ security technologies, to ensure 
WPA2 maintains strong security protections as the wireless landscape evolves. WPA2 continues to be 
mandatory for all Wi-Fi CERTIFIED devices. As market adoption of WPA3 grows, the new generation of 
Wi-Fi security will become required for all Wi-Fi CERTIFIED devices. WPA3 maintains 
interoperability with WPA2 devices through a transitional mode of operation, and Wi-Fi users can 
remain confident they are protected when connected to secured Wi-Fi CERTIFIED networks. “WPA3 
takes the lead in providing the industry’s strongest protections in the ever-changing security 
landscape,” said Edgar Figueroa, President and CEO, Wi-Fi Alliance. “WPA3 continues the 
evolution of Wi-Fi security and maintains the brand promise of Wi-Fi Protected Access.” Wi-Fi 
Alliance is also introducing Wi-Fi CERTIFIED Easy Connect™, a new program that reduces the 
complexity of onboarding Wi-Fi devices with limited or no display interface – such as devices 
coming to market for Internet of Things (IoT) – while still maintaining high security standards. 
Wi-Fi Easy Connect™ enables users to securely add any device to a Wi-Fi network using another 
device with a more robust interface, such as a smartphone, by simply scanning a product quick 
response (QR) code. Wi-Fi Easy Connect and WPA3 represent the latest evolution in Wi-Fi Alliance 
programs to ensure users receive a positive experience while remaining securely connected as the 
security landscape evolves. “The evolution of Wi-Fi to stay ahead of market needs has been 
critical to it remaining one of wireless technology’s greatest success stories,” said Phil 
Solis, Research Director for IDC. “Wi-Fi Alliance has been instrumental in Wi-Fi’s evolution, 
and diligent about delivering Wi-Fi CERTIFIED programs so users and a variety of markets can rely 
on the convenience of Wi-Fi connectivity and security to meet their needs.” Wi-Fi Alliance 
recently introduced Wi-Fi CERTIFIED Enhanced Open™, a certification program that delivers new 
benefits for users in open Wi-Fi networks. In scenarios where user authentication is not desired or 
distribution of credentials is impractical – such as local coffee shops or guest networks with a 
web portal in airports, hotels, and sports arenas – Wi-Fi Enhanced Open™ now delivers improved 
data protections while maintaining the convenience and ease-of-use of open networks. For more 
information, please visit: https://www.wi-fi.org/security and 
https://www.wi-fi.org/wi-fi-easy-connect . Industry support for WPA3 and Wi-Fi Easy Connect: 
“2018 is a transformative year for Wi-Fi with new standards being published such as WPA3, which 
is the latest evolution of Wi-Fi Protected Access, taking security to a level of robustness and 
resiliency not seen before. Coupling WPA3 with the promise of 802.11ax’s efficiency will allow 
Wi-Fi to reach levels of security and performance unimaginable only a few years ago.” – Alan 
Amrod, SVP &amp; GM, Products &amp; Marketing, Aerohive Networks "Security has always been a key 
component of Wi-Fi's broad appeal and Wi-Fi Alliance’s certifications. Ruckus is in full support 
of continuing to evolve the certification of security standards to meet potential new threats. We 
are actively developing new software to take full advantage of Wi-Fi CERTIFIED WPA3 for the benefit 
of our customers and their millions of end users around the world.” - said Mark Hamilton, 
Principal Networking Standards Engineer, Ruckus Networks, an ARRIS Company “As Wi-Fi evolves to 
deliver more value in an ever expanding array of use cases, it’s important that security evolves 
too. WPA3’s new features, such as improved password based authentication and stronger encryption, 
will further simplify and strengthen how consumers and businesses connect to the Internet every 
day.” – Vijay Nagarajan, senior director of marketing for Wireless Communications and 
Connectivity division at Broadcom Cisco is in full support of Wi-Fi Alliance’s continual focus on 
security evolution to WPA3. The WPA3 program will bring much needed upgrades to wireless security 
protecting all levels of customers from consumer to enterprise/government. Cisco is committed to 
integrating WPA3 features into our Aironet Access Points and Wireless Controllers via a firmware 
upgrade so that our existing and new customers can take advantage of the capabilities offered by 
WPA3. - Greg Dorai, Vice President Cisco WLAN, Cisco “WPA3 and Wi-Fi Enhanced Open provide a 
comprehensive security offering without added complexity. With WPA3, users will receive better 
experiences with passwords that are easier to remember and manage, and IT will be able to ensure 
consistent and strong cryptography throughout their infrastructure. Aruba has already begun to 
incorporate and certify WPA3 for future designs to ensure the most advanced protection for our 
customer’s data.” – Dan Harkins, Distinguished Technologist, Aruba, a Hewlett Packard Company 
“WPA3 is another milestone for the Wi-Fi industry, the extreme high throughput and enhanced 
security delivered by Wi-Fi will provide an excellent end-user experience in both consumer and 
enterprise markets. We are pleased to see Wi-Fi to continue to enable the digital transformation in 
many sectors and businesses.” – Dr. Wen Tong, Huawei Fellow, CTO, Huawei Wireless “WPA3 
brings critical updates to Wi-Fi security for personal and enterprise networks. Intel supports WPA3 
and through our involvement in the test bed, we are helping our customers incorporate WPA3 into 
their products for enhanced security protections.” – Eric Mclaughlin – GM, CCG Wireless, 
Intel “Marvell has worked in close cooperation with Wi-Fi Alliance on Wi-Fi CERTIFIED WPA3 and 
Wi-Fi Easy Connect. WPA3 builds on the widespread adoption of WPA2 and delivers a high level of 
security for both personal and enterprise Wi-Fi networks. We support these latest programs as 
together they provide strong protection against security threats while also enhancing the 
connectivity user experience for our customers.” – Mark Montierth, VP and GM of the Wireless 
Connectivity Business Unit at Marvell “Hospitals are keenly aware of the critical importance of 
data privacy and security, and maintaining a robust security policy means accessing the strongest 
security measures available. Philips applauds Wi-Fi Alliance for building upon the success of WPA2 
with the latest security mechanisms now available in WPA3.” – Phil Raymond, Director, Wireless 
CoE, MA&amp;TC CTO Office, Philips Healthtech “Qualcomm Technologies is committed to safeguarding 
the trust that millions of users and businesses put in Wi-Fi every day. We are proud to be among 
the first companies to support WPA3 across our portfolio of mobile and networking infrastructure 
products, and we are working closely with Wi-Fi Alliance and key stakeholders to accelerate its 
adoption throughout all major industries and ecosystems that rely on Wi-Fi.” – said Rahul 
Patel, senior vice president and general manager, connectivity and networking, Qualcomm 
Technologies, Inc. “Silicon Motion proudly supports the industry transition to WPA3. Our new low 
power Wi-Fi SoC, built for IoT applications, supports both the mandatory and optional elements of 
WPA3 so that our customers can enable the highest level of security possible for their Wi-Fi and 
low power IoT applications.” - David Cohen, Sr. Marketing Director, Silicon Motion, Inc. 
