USB Data Performance  
Language Usage Guidelines from USB-IF 
USB-IF emphasizes the importance and value of consistent messaging on USB product packaging, marketing materials, 
and advertising. Inconsistent use of terminology creates confusion in the marketplace, can be misleading to consumers, 
and potentially diminishes USB-IF’s trademark rights.  
When referring to a product that is based on and compliant with the USB Data Performance specifications (i.e., USB4®, 
USB 3.2, and USB 2.0) manufacturers must clearly identify the performance capabilities of that device separately from 
other product benefits and/or physical characteristics in product manuals, data sheets and marketing materials. 
In order to identify performance capabilities, USB-IF strongly recommends submitting products to the USB-IF 
Compliance Program and then, once successful, using the logos for consumer recognition. The USB-IF logo guidelines are 
available here: http://www.usb.org/developers/logo_license/.  
USB Data Performance Overview 
The USB4® and USB 3.2 specifications together identify five transfer rates – 80Gbps, 40Gbps, 20Gbps, 10Gbps, and 
5Gbps. Vendors must clearly communicate the performance signaling that a product delivers in the product’s packaging, 
advertising content, and any other marketing materials.  
To avoid consumer confusion, USB-IF’s recommended nomenclature for consumers is listed below: 
•
Marketing name: USB 80Gbps
o
Product capability: product signals at 80Gbps
•
Marketing name: USB 40Gbps
o
Product capability: product signals at 40Gbps
•
Marketing name: USB 20Gbps
o
Product capability: product signals at 20Gbps
•
Marketing name: USB 10Gbps
o
Product capability: product signals at 10Gbps
•
Marketing name: USB 5Gbps
o
Product capability: product signals at 5Gbps
NOTE: USB4® Version 2.0, USB4® Version 1.0, USB 3.2, SuperSpeed Plus, Enhanced SuperSpeed and SuperSpeed+ are 
defined in the USB specifications however these terms are not intended to be used in product names, messaging, 
packaging or any other consumer-facing content.     
There are separate Language and Packaging Usage Guidelines for the USB Type-C® Cable and Connector Specification, 
found here: https://www.usb.org/sites/default/files/usb_typec_language_product_and_packaging_guidelines_20230320.pdf  
USB-IF Product Data Base Notice to OEMs and Manufacturers 
The term(s) “TBT3” or “Thunderbolt” should not be used in the USB-IF product/marketing description of products being 
listed in the USB-IF data base that are being submitted/certified by the USB-IF.  
Note, companies may choose to use these term(s) “TBT3” or “Thunderbolt” as part of their actual product information 
as authorized by Intel, but these terms do not belong in the USB-IF data base.   
