 
 
 USB 3.2 Specification 
Language Usage Guidelines from USB-IF 
 
USB-IF emphasizes the importance and value of consistent messaging on USB product 
packaging, marketing materials, and advertising. Inconsistent use of terminology creates 
confusion in the marketplace, can be misleading to consumers and potentially diminishes 
USB-IF’s trademark rights.  
The USB usage model is evolving. The USB ecosystem has expanded to include multiple 
connectors, performance levels, and power capabilities to meet the needs of manufacturers 
and developers. When referring to a product that is based on and compliant with the USB 
3.2 specification, it is critical for manufacturers to clearly identify the performance 
capabilities of that device separately from other product benefits and/or physical 
characteristics.   
USB 3.2 Specification  
The USB 3.2 specification defines multi-lane operation for new USB 3.2 hosts and devices, 
allowing for up to two lanes of 10Gbps operation to realize a 20Gbps data transfer rate. 
While USB hosts and devices were originally designed as single-lane solutions, USB TypeC™ cables were designed from the outset to support multi-lane operation to ensure a path 
for scalable performance.   
The USB 3.2 specification absorbed all prior 3.x specifications. USB 3.2 identifies three 
transfer rates, USB 3.2 Gen 1 at 5Gbps, USB 3.2 Gen 2 at 10Gbps and USB 3.2 Gen 2x2 at 
20Gbps. It is important that vendors clearly communicate the performance signaling that a 
product delivers in the product’s packaging, advertising content, and any other marketing 
materials.   
• 
USB 3.2 Gen 1  
o 
Product capability: product signals at 5Gbps  
o 
Marketing name: SuperSpeed USB 
• 
USB 3.2 Gen 2  
o 
Product capability: product signals at 10Gbps  
o 
Marketing name: SuperSpeed USB 10Gbps 
• 
USB 3.2 Gen 2x2 
o 
Product capability: product signals at 20Gbps 
o 
Marketing name: SuperSpeed USB 20Gbps 
 
NOTE: SuperSpeed Plus, Enhanced SuperSpeed and SuperSpeed+ are defined in the USB 
specifications however these terms are not intended to be used in product names, 
messaging, packaging or any other consumer-facing content.     
USB 3.2 Key Messages  
• 
Defines multi-lane operation for new USB 3.2 hosts and devices, allowing for up to 
two lanes of 10Gbps operation to realize a 20Gbps data transfer rate, without 
sacrificing cable length. 
• 
Delivers compelling performance boosts to meet requirements for demanding USB 
storage, display, and docking applications. 
• 
Enables end-users to move content across devices quickly, conveniently and without 
worrying about compatibility.  
• 
Backwards compatible with all existing USB products; will operate at lowest common 
speed capability. 

 
 
• 
Enables devices from different vendors to interoperate in an open architecture, while 
maintaining and leveraging the existing USB infrastructure. 
• 
Allows system OEMs and peripheral developers adequate room for product versatility 
and market differentiation without the burden of carrying obsolete interfaces or 
losing compatibility.  
 
USB 3.2 Naming and Packaging Recommendations  
 
To avoid consumer confusion, USB-IF’s recommended nomenclature for consumers is 
“SuperSpeed USB” for 5Gbps products, “SuperSpeed USB 10Gbps” for 10Gbps products and 
“SuperSpeed USB 20Gbps” for 20Gbps products.  
In order to identify performance capabilities, USB-IF strongly recommends submitting 
products to the USB-IF Compliance Program and then, once successful, using the logos for 
consumer recognition. The USB-IF logo guidelines are available here: 
http://www.usb.org/developers/logo_license/.  
The SuperSpeed USB 20Gbps Compliance and Logo Program is currently under development 
and will be announced once available.  
It is critical for manufacturers to distinguish between USB 3.2 Gen 1, USB 3.2 Gen 2 and 
USB 3.2 Gen 2x2 products. USB-IF also strongly urges manufacturers to identify the 
performance capabilities of a product separately from other protocols or physical 
characteristics in product names and marketing materials.  
Please note the following:  
- 
USB 3.2 only defines the transfer rate of a product.  
o 
USB 3.2 is not USB Type-C™, USB Standard-A, Micro-USB, or any other USB 
cable or connector. 
o 
USB 3.2 is not USB Power Delivery or USB Battery Charging. 
 
There are separate Language and Packaging Usage Guidelines for the USB Type-C™ Cable 
and Connector Specification, found here: 
http://www.usb.org/developers/usbtypec/USB_TypeC_Language_Product_and_Packaging_Guidelines_FINAL.pdf.   
 
USB Compliance Messages  
• 
Only products that have passed the requirements of the USB Compliance Program 
can utilize the USB-IF logo licensing program. Please reference the Trademark 
License Agreement (found here: http://www.usb.org/developers/logo_license/) for 
more information.  
• 
USB-IF logos may be used solely in conjunction with product as set forth in the USB 
Logo Usage Guidelines.  
