USB4® Specification  
Language Usage Guidelines from USB-IF 
USB-IF emphasizes the importance and value of consistent messaging on USB product packaging, 
marketing materials, and advertising. Inconsistent use of terminology creates confusion in the 
marketplace, can be misleading to consumers, and potentially diminishes USB-IF’s trademark rights.  
The USB usage model is evolving. The USB ecosystem has expanded to include multiple connectors, 
performance levels, and power capabilities to meet the needs of manufacturers and developers. When 
referring to a product that is based on and compliant with the USB4® specification, manufacturers must 
clearly identify the performance capabilities of that device separately from other product benefits 
and/or physical characteristics.  
USB4® Specification 
The USB4® specification compliments and build upon the existing USB 3.2 and USB 2.0 specifications. 
The USB4® architecture defines a method to share a single high-speed link with multiple end device 
types dynamically that best serves the transfer of data by type and application.  
As the USB Type-C® connector has evolved into the role of the external display port of many host 
products, the USB4® specification provides the host the ability to optimally scale allocations for display 
data flow. Even as the USB4® specification introduces a new underlying protocol, compatibility with 
existing USB 3.2, USB 2.0 and Thunderbolt 3 hosts and devices is supported; the resulting connection 
scales to the best mutual capability of the devices being connected.  
 
USB4® identifies two transfer rates, USB4® 20Gbps at 20Gbps and USB4® 40Gbps at 40Gbps. Vendors 
must clearly communicate the performance signaling that a product delivers in the product’s packaging, 
advertising content, and any other marketing materials.  
 
• 
Marketing name: USB4® 20Gbps  
o Product capability: product signals at 20Gbps  
• 
Marketing name: USB4® 40Gbps  
o Product capability: product signals at 40Gbps  
USB4® Key Messages  
• 
Two-lane operation using existing USB Type-C® cables  
• 
Doubles the bandwidth to extend USB Type-C® performance 
• 
Up to 40Gbps operation over 40Gbps-certified cables 
• 
Enables multiple simultaneous data and display protocols 
• 
Multiple data and display protocols efficiently share the total available bus bandwidth  
• 
USB4® hosts can optimally scale allocations for display data flow  
• 
Backward compatibility with USB 3.2, USB 2.0 and Thunderbolt 3 
 
Trademarks  
“USB4®” is a registered trademark of USB Implementers Forum and is only intended for use with 
products based on and compliant with the USB4® specification.  

The registered trademark notice symbol ® must be included in the first instance of  
“USB4®” in any material. USB4® should not be translated into languages other than English.  
The following trademark attribution statement should be included in any materials using the word mark 
“USB4®”: 
USB4® is a registered trademark of USB Implementers Forum.  
USB4® 
When referring to a product that is based on and compliant with the USB4® specification, the word mark 
“USB4®” is acceptable terminology in all print and/or digital circumstances. No other variation is 
recommended by USB-IF.  
 
USB-IF recommends “USB4®” be used in at least the first mention in the following materials:  
• 
Press releases 
• 
Technology bulletins 
• 
Product announcements 
• 
Product spec sheets 
• 
Product manuals   
• 
Product websites 
 
USB-IF Product Data Base Notice to OEMs and Manufacturers  
The term(s) “TBT3” or “Thunderbolt” should not be used in the USB-IF product/marketing description of 
products being listed in the USB-IF data base that are being submitted/certified by the USB-IF.  
Note, companies may choose to use these term(s) “TBT3” or “Thunderbolt” as part of their actual 
product information as authorized by Intel, but these terms do not belong in the USB-IF data base.   
Notice to retailers, resellers or distributors  
Online retailers, resellers and distributors are responsible for ensuring the products sold via their 
channels using USB4® trademarks are compliant with the USB4® specification. The USB-IF website 
features a public product search that lists the products certified to bear the USB-IF logo(s). The product 
search can be found here: https://www.usb.org/products. Inquiries regarding retail marketing for USB4® 
products can be sent to admin@usb.org.   
Approved use in educational resources  
Requests to use USB4® in educational materials must be submitted to USB-IF for consideration and will 
be decided upon on an individual basis. Please submit requests via email to admin@usb.org.  
 
 USB4® Naming and Packaging Recommendations 
To avoid consumer confusion, USB-IF’s recommended nomenclature for consumers is “USB4® 20Gbps” 
for 20Gbps products and “USB4® 40Gbps” for 40Gbps products.  

In order to identify performance capabilities, USB-IF strongly recommends submitting products to the 
USB-IF Compliance Program and then, once successful, using the logos for consumer recognition. The 
USB-IF logo guidelines are available here: http://www.usb.org/developers/logo_license/.  
USB-IF also strongly urges manufacturers to identify the performance capabilities of a product 
separately from other protocols or physical characteristics in product manuals, data sheets and 
marketing materials.  
Please note the following:  
• 
USB4® protocol specification only defines the performance capabilities that may be 
implemented in a product.  
o USB4® is not SuperSpeed USB, USB Type-C®, USB Standard-A, Micro-USB, or any other 
USB cable or connector. 
o USB4® is not USB Power Delivery or USB Battery Charging.  
There are separate Language and Packaging Usage Guidelines for the USB Type-C® Cable and Connector 
Specification, found here: https://www.usb.org/sites/default/files/usb_typec_language_product_and_packaging_guidelines_final.pdf. 
USB Compliance Messages  
• 
Only products that have passed the requirements of the USB Compliance Program can 
utilize the USB-IF logo licensing program. Please reference the Trademark License 
Agreement (found here: http://www.usb.org/developers/logo_license/) for more 
information.  
• 
USB-IF logos may be used solely in conjunction with a product as set forth in the USB Logo 
Usage Guidelines. 
