1
USB Performance Logo Usage Guidelines
USB Performance Logo Usage Guidelines  |  © 2024 USB Implementers Forum, Inc. (USB-IF). All rights reserved.

This document provides information pertaining to USB Performance 
Logos. 
Logo Usage Guidelines for Hi-Speed USB and Certified USB Chargers can 
be found here.
Logo Usage Guidelines for USB Type-C® Cable Logos can be found here.

1:1
4:1	
Logo Color
USB Logo Color Formulas
USB Logo Color Versions
5:1	
Logo Improper Usage
6:1	
Layout and Logo Usage
Including USB Performance Logos on  
Various Materials
USB Performance Packaging
USB Performance Collateral and Advertisements
USB Performance Manuals
7:1	
Art Files
Table of Contents
1:2	
Introduction
1:3	
General Logo Usage Guidelines
2:1	
Logos and Word Mark
Word Mark and Trademark Attribution Statement
USB Packaging Logos
USB Port Logos
USB Device Power Port Logos
3:1	
Logo Usage (All Versions)
Minimum Clear Space
Minimum Size
Logo Orientation
Welcome to the USB Performance 
Logo Usage Guidelines.

1:2
USB Performance Logo Usage Guidelines  |  © 2024 USB Implementers Forum, Inc. (USB-IF). All rights reserved.
We are expanding the USB experience 
through quality and ease of use.
The Universal Serial Bus (USB) has gone beyond its 
original intent to connect peripherals to PCs and is now a 
prevailing standard in the interconnect market. USB can 
be found everywhere from PCs to consumer electronics to 
mobile devices. Because of its ease of use, speed and 
expandability, USB is the preferred connection for many 
consumers. This presents a continued market opportunity 
for the future. 
In order to realize this opportunity, USB products 
must continue to enhance the consumers’ experience 
through high quality and ease of use. That’s why USB 
Implementers Forum, Inc. (USB-IF) developed trademarkprotected USB Performance Packaging Logos, Port Logos, 
and Device Power Port Logos for use by qualified parties. 
To qualify for the right to display these logos, products 
must pass the specified USB-IF compliance testing for 
product quality. 
USB Performance Logos at a glance
USB Performance-only Packaging Logos and Cable and Port Logos
USB Device Power Port Logos
USB Word Mark
USB4® 
Introduction

1:3
To maintain the integrity of the USB 
Performance Logos, all Guidelines must 
be followed. Refer to this page and 
the following section for a complete 
understanding of how to use the USB 
Performance Logos.
Your Brand in Relation to USB Logos
Your company name, logo, or product name must appear 
on any products or related materials where the USB 
Performance Packaging, Port, and Device Power Port 
Logos are used. The Logos cannot be larger or more 
prominent than your product name, trademark, logo, or 
company name. 
USB Logo Usage Certification Requirement
As stated in Section 2 of the USB-IF Trademark License 
Agreement, a Certified USB-IF logo may be used solely in 
conjunction with a product that has been submitted to 
and passed the USB-IF Compliance Testing Program and 
are included on the USB-IF Integrators List. The company 
also must have a valid USB-IF Trademark License 
Agreement on file. USB-IF Certified Logos cannot be 
used generically on your website or product packaging, 
collateral, advertisements, or manuals.
Important: Please refer to the USB-IF Trademark License 
Agreement Mark Requirements Chart for details regarding 
the USB-IF Test Procedures and other requirements.
USB Logos Must Not Be Altered
You must use the logos exactly as they are shown in the 
USB-IF digital artwork files; you may not imitate the USB 
Performance Packaging, Port, and Device Power Port 
Logos in any of your materials.
USB Logos May Not Be Used as a Design Feature
The USB Performance Packaging, Port, and Device Power 
Port Logos may not be used as a design feature on any of 
your materials.
USB Logos Can Not Be Combined 
With Any Other Feature
You may not combine the USB Performance Packaging, 
Port, and Device Power Port Logos with any other feature, 
including other marks, words, graphics, photos, slogans, 
numbers, design features, or symbols.
General Logo Usage Guidelines

2:1
Word Mark and 
Trademark Attribution Statement
USB-IF Word Mark
“USB4® is a registered trademark of USB Implementers 
Forum and is only for use with products based on and 
compliant with the USB4® specification. 
The trademark notice symbol ® must be included in the first 
instance of “USB4®” in any material. USB4® should not be 
translated into languages other than English.
Trademark Attribution Statement
The trademark attribution statement should be included 
in any materials using the word mark “USB4®”
USB-IF Word Mark
Trademark Attribution Statement
USB4® is a registered trademark of 
USB Implementers Forum.
Logos and Word Mark
USB4®

2:2
USB Packaging Logos
The USB Packaging Logos may be used by companies 
with a valid USB-IF Trademark License Agreement on file. 
Products using the Packaging Logo must indicate the 
port’s signaling capability (i.e. 5Gbps, etc.) that have been 
submitted to and passed the USB-IF Test procedures for 
the corresponding performance and have been posted on 
the USB-IF Integrators List.
The USB Packaging Logo may be reproduced only in the 
versions shown in this document and may not be altered 
in any way. Please note that the trademark (®) and the 
word “certified” are integral parts of the Logos. They are 
considered part of the Logo art and should not be altered 
in any way. The Logos must be reproduced from the  
USB-IF digital artwork files. 
Logos and Word Mark

2:3
USB Port Logos
The USB Port Logos may be used by companies with a valid 
USB-IF Trademark License Agreement on file and indicates 
the port’s signaling capability (i.e. 5Gbps, etc.). The USB Port 
Logo may be used on End Product Host(s) with certified Si 
regardless of whether the end product is certified. The USB 
Port Logos may also be used on Host(s), peripheral device(s), 
or hub(s) when the entire end product is certified and has 
been posted on the USB-IF Integrators List.
Logos and Word Mark

2:4
USB Device Power Port Logos
The USB Device Power Port Logo may be used by 
companies with a valid USB-IF Trademark License 
Agreement on file. The USB Device Power Logo may 
solely be used in conjunction with products consisting of 
Host(s), peripheral device(s), or hub(s) that have been 
submitted to and passed the USB-IF Test procedures for 
the corresponding performance, USB Power Delivery and 
USB Type-C® testing requirements, and have been posted 
on the USB-IF Integrators List.
Logos and Word Mark

2:5
USB Packaging Logo Spacing
These requirements apply to use of the USB Packaging 
Logos and must be followed.
Minimum Clear Space 
Avoid visual clutter by maintaining a minimum amount of 
clear space around the Logo that is equal to 1/2 the height 
of USB.
Minimum Size for Print
The minimum width of the Logo is 1 inch (25.4 mm).
Minimum Size for On-Screen
The minimum width of the Logo is 82 pixels. 
Logo Alignment
To align the Logo correctly with margins or other 
elements, use the top and left edge of the circular arc.
USB Performance Logo Usage Guidelines  |  © 2024 USB Implementers Forum, Inc. (USB-IF). All rights reserved.
Logo Usage
Minimum Clear Space
Minimum Size for Print
Minimum Size for On-Screen
Logo Alignment
Align Left Edge of double-line cable 
graphic for Horizontal Alignment
Minimum Size 
includes the logo 
Clear Space, 
indicated by the 
blue margin.
1/2 X
1/2 X
1/2 X
1/2 X
X
1 inch
82 pixels
Align Top Edge of “Certified” 
for Vertical Alignment
Examples
Minimum Size for Print

2:6
Logo Usage
Minimum Clear Space
Minimum Size
Logo Orientation
USB Port Logo Spacing
These requirements apply to use of the USB Port Logos 
and must be followed.
Clear Space
Avoid visual clutter by maintaining a minimum amount of 
clear space around the Logo that is equal to the height of 
cable end device for the size selected.
Minimum Size
The minimum size of the largest dimension of the Logo is 
.2 inches (5 mm).
Logo Orientation
The Logo can be oriented horizontally or vertically.
Please Note: The USB 80Gbps Port Logo 
is only to be used on devices.
Licensee is not obligated to use the “®” and may omit the trademark ® symbol on the 
USB Port Logo for mobile and non-mobile Product, for which the Licensee is printing/
engraving on chassis where the reasonable alternatives for the location and size of the 
Logo do not allow for the symbol to have a maximum dimension of 15mm or more. This 
permission is limited only to these exact situations. 
Where the symbol is so omitted, the manufacturer/Licensees must include the following 
statement (corresponding the appropriate Port Logo) in their user’s manual/printed 
materials accompanying the Product: “The USB 80Gbps Port Logo is a trademark of USB 
Implementers Forum, Inc.” and must be accompanied with the image of the mark with 
the correct rendering of the ®.
1X
1X
X
1X
1X
.2 inches
Horizontal 
Orientation
Vertical 
Orientation
Examples

2:7
Logo Usage
Minimum Clear Space
Minimum Size
.2 inches
USB Device Power Port Logo Spacing
These requirements apply to use of the USB Device Power 
Port Logos and must be followed.
Clear Space
Avoid visual clutter by maintaining a minimum amount of 
clear space around the Logo that is equal to the width of 
the battery terminal for the size selected.
Minimum Sizes
The minimum size of the largest dimension of the Logo 
is .2 inches (5 mm). Measurement does not include the “®”.
Logo Orientation
The Logo can be oriented horizontally with the battery 
terminal to the right or vertically with the battery terminal 
to the top.
1X
1X
1X
1X
X
Logo Orientation
Vertical 
Orientation
Licensee in not obligated to use the “®” and may omit the trademark ® symbol on the 
USB Device Power Port Logo for mobile and non-mobile Product, for which 
the Licensee is printing/engraving on chassis where the reasonable alternatives for 
the location and size of the Logos do not allow for the symbol to have a maximum 
dimension of 15mm or more. This permission is limited only to these exact situations.
Where the symbol is so omitted, the manufacturer/Licensees must include the 
following statement (corresponding the appropriate Device Power Port Logo) in their 
user’s manual/printed materials accompanying the Product: “The USB 80Gbps 
Device Power Port Logo is a trademark of USB Implementers Forum, Inc.” and must 
be accompanied with the proper USB Device Power Port image of the mark with 
the correct rendering of the ®.
Horizontal 
Orientation
Examples

2:8
USB Packaging Logo Color Formulas
These requirements apply to use of the USB Packaging 
Logo and must be followed.
The USB Packaging Logos have been created as a 2-color 
Logo. (Other color versions are shown on the following 
pages). It is best to reproduce the Logo using the PANTONE® 
numbers shown at the right. When reproducing these 
colors in 4-color process inks, or on-screen (RGB), the 
screen tints listed here should be used.
Different color models may reproduce the USB Red and 
USB Blue with slight color variations, e.g., a Logo printed 
using USB Red as a spot color may result in a slightly 
different hue of red when compared to one printed using 
4-color process or compared to an on-screen (RGB) Logo.
PANTONE Colors displayed here may not match 
PANTONE-identified standards. Consult current PANTONE 
Color Publications for accurate color. PANTONE® is the 
property of Pantone, Inc.
Logo Color
USB Red
PMS
PANTONE® 185C
CMYK
C0 - M91 - Y76 - K0
RGB
R235 - G0 - B41
USB Blue
PMS
PANTONE® 653C
CMYK
C100 - M62 - Y0 - K20
RGB
R52­ - G96 - B148
USB Blue
USB Red
USB Red
USB Red
USB 80Gbps Packaging Logo Colors
Example

2:9
Two-Color Logo
USB Red PANTONE® 185C 
USB Blue PANTONE® 653C
One-Color Logo
Black
Reversed Logo
On dark-colored background
USB Packaging Logo Color Versions
Two-Color Logo
The 2-color version is the preferred version of the 
USB Packaging Logos. 
One-Color Logo
The 1-color, black version of the USB Packaging Logos 
should be used for single-color applications. 
Reversed Logo
The reversed version of the USB Packaging Logos should 
be used on dark backgrounds and over photography. 
When placed over photography make sure to use 
photographs that have enough tone to support the 
Logo and don’t prohibit legibility.
Note:
PANTONE Colors displayed here may not match 
PANTONE-identified standards. Consult current PANTONE 
Color Publications for accurate color. PANTONE® is the 
property of Pantone, Inc.
Logo Color
Examples

5:1
USB Performance Packaging Logos 
Improper Usage
Proper use of the USB Logos strengthens their effectiveness 
each time they are seen. The following examples depict 
unacceptable uses of the USB Logos for both print and onscreen applications. These examples use the USB 20Gbps 
Packaging Logo but apply to the USB 5Gbps, 10Gbps, 
40Gbps, and 80Gbps Packaging Logos as well.
You must use the Logos exactly as they are shown in the 
USB-IF digital artwork files. No alterations are permitted.
1  Don’t place the Logo on a busy background. 
A busy background would not follow the clear space 
guidelines, spelled out earlier in this document.
2  Don’t change the colors of the Logo.
3  Don’t use any version of the Logos without the  
     “double-line cable graphic.”
4  Don’t use the Logo without the trademark ® symbol.
5  Don’t use the Logo without the word “CERTIFIED”.
6   Don’t use the USB Performance Packaging Logos  
 
      without their speed indicators.
Logo Improper Usage
1
2
3
4
5
6

6:1
Including the USB Performance 
Logos on Various Materials
Incorporating the USB Performance Packaging Logos,  
Port Logos, and Device Power Port Logos into your 
packaging, marketing materials, advertisements 
and manuals strengthens your marketing efforts by 
informing your consumers of the USB compatibility of 
your product(s). The following pages show samples of 
various marketing materials and examples of the USB 
Performance Logo placement.
Examples shown on this page can only be used in 
correlation with a product that has been certified by the 
USB-IF and met the specific certification requirements.
Layout and Logo Usage
USB Performance Logo Layout examples at a glance
Packaging
Collateral and Advertising
Manuals

6:2
USB Performace Packaging
Packaging is printed in a variety of ways. Coarse printing, 
such as flexography on corrugate or screen printing on 
various materials, may benefit from using the 1-color 
or the reversed Logo. Product that is printed using finer 
printing methods, such as 4-color process, can choose  
any Logo that best fits its Product box’s design. The goal  
is to choose the Logo that will reproduce most attractively 
onto the material upon which it is being printed.
Example shown on this page can only be used in 
correlation with a product that has been certified by the 
USB-IF and met the specific certification requirements.
Layout and Logo Usage: Packaging

6:3
USB Performance  Collateral 
and Advertisements
Collateral
Where you are not restricted by color, the full-color Logo 
can be used for your print material. In situations where 
color is restricted, use the 1-color or reversed versions 
of the Logo.
One-Color Advertisements 
For 1-color newspaper advertisements, use the black 
or reversed version of the Logo.
Full-Color Magazine Advertisements 
Full-color magazine ads may use the 1-color, reversed 
or full-color versions of the Logo, choosing the Logo that 
works best with the design of the ad.
Examples shown on this page can only be used in 
correlation with a product that has been certified by the 
USB-IF and met the specific certification requirements.
Layout and Logo Usage: Collateral and Advertisements
Collateral
One-Color Advertisement
Full-Color Magazine Advertisement

6:4
USB Performance  Manuals
Where the ® symbol of the USB Performance Port Logos and Device Power Port 
Logos have been omitted on the printing/engraving on Product chassis, the 
manufacturer/Licensees must include the following statement(s) in their user’s 
manual/printed materials accompanying the Product:
Statement 1
“The USB 5Gbps Port Logo is a trademark of the USB Implementers Forum, Inc.”
Statement 2
“The USB 10Gbps Port Logo is a trademark of the USB Implementers Forum, Inc.”
Statement 3
“The USB 20Gbps Port Logo is a trademark of the USB Implementers Forum, Inc.”
Statement 4
“The USB 40Gbps Port Logo is a trademark of the USB Implementers Forum, Inc.”
Statement 5
“The USB 80Gbps Port Logo is a trademark of the USB Implementers Forum, Inc.”
Statement 6
“The USB Device Power Port Logo is a trademark of the USB Implementers Forum, Inc.”
The statement(s) must be accompanied with the proper USB Performance 
Port Logos and Device Power Port Logos image of the mark(s) with the correct 
rendering of the ®.
Example shown on this page can only be used in correlation with a product that 
has been certified by the USB-IF and met the specific certification requirements.
Manual Example
Layout and Logo Usage: Manuals
Trademark statement with 
correct rendering of the “®” and 
Logo

7:1
Art Files
The following USB Performance Logos 
are available in various digital file formats.
USB 5Gbps, USB 10Gbps, USB 20Gbps, USB 40Gbps, and 
USB 80Gbps Packaging Logos, Port Logos, and Device 
Power Port Logos
Print Applications
Encapsulated Postscript (EPS) files were created in Adobe* 
Illustrator* and can be reproduced at any size without 
compromising quality. Use these versions for printing. Each 
version is a separate file. Logos can be printed using either 
PANTONE® colors or the 4-color process mix specified on 
page 6. Type has been converted to outlines; no fonts are 
required to reproduce the Logos. The files have been saved 
for both Macintosh* and PC.
* Third-party names and brands are the property 
of their respective owners. PANTONE® is the 
property of Pantone, Inc.
On-Screen Applications
These versions are for on-screen applications such as the 
Web or Microsoft* PowerPoint* presentations. They have 
been created in RGB color mode and should not be used 
for offset printing. These versions were rasterized in Adobe* 
Photoshop* from Adobe Illustrator files (with the exception 
of the EPS files). Keep in mind that these files look their best 
when placed at 100% size, or smaller.
PNG and or JPG files are provided for use in 
on-screen applications.
EPS files were created in Adobe* Illustrator* and are 
saved in RGB color format. These files are to be used in 
software applications that utilize vector-based artwork, 
e.g., Adobe* Flash*.
