Podcast Measurement 
5ecInJcaM (uJdeMJnes   
Version . 
Released .BZ 0
1MeBse eNBiM sVQQorU!iBCUeDIMBC.DoN XiUI GeeECBDL or RVesUions. 5Iis EoDVNenU is 
BWBiMBCMe onMine BU IUUQsiBCUeDIMBC.DoNsUBnEBrEsQoEDBsUNeBsVreNenUHViEeMines
 0 *"# 5eDInoMoHZ -BCorBUorZ 

About This Document
The IAB Tech Lab Podcast Technical Measurement Guidelines was developed to address
measurement of downloaded media and the ads included in those downloads. Companies can
apply for compliance with these guidelines, but compliance details are defined separately. Visit
https://iabtechlab.com/compliance-programs/ to learn more.
About IAB Tech Lab
The IAB Technology Laboratory is a nonprofit research and development consortium charged
with producing and helping companies implement global industry technical standards and
solutions. The goal of the Tech Lab is to reduce friction associated with the digital advertising
and marketing supply chain while contributing to the safe growth of an industry. The IAB Tech
Lab spearheads the development of technical standards, creates and maintains a code library
to assist in rapid, cost-effective implementation of IAB standards, and establishes a test platform
for companies to evaluate the compatibility of their technology solutions with IAB standards,
which for 18 years have been the foundation for interoperability and profitable growth in the
digital advertising supply chain. Further details about the IAB Technology Lab can be found at
https://iabtechlab.com.
IAB Tech Lab lead:
Katie Stroud, Senior Product Manager, Ad Experiences
DISCLAIMER:
IAB TECHNOLOGY LABORATORY, INC. (“IAB TECH LAB”) PROVIDES THESE GUIDELINES AS A
PRACTICAL GUIDE AND RESOURCE FOR GENERAL INFORMATION. PLEASE BE AWARE THAT
THESE GUIDELINES DO NOT CONSTITUTE LEGAL ADVICE, AND IF YOU HAVE ANY LEGAL
QUESTIONS, PLEASE CONSULT YOUR ATTORNEY. WHILE IAB TECH LAB HAS MADE EFFORTS
TO ASSURE THE ACCURACY OF THE MATERIAL IN THESE GUIDELINES, THEY SHOULD NOT BE
TREATED AS A BASIS FOR FORMULATING BUSINESS AND LEGAL DECISIONS WITHOUT
INDIVIDUALIZED LEGAL ADVICE.
IAB TECH LAB MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AS TO
THE COMPLETENESS, CORRECTNESS, OR UTILITY OF THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN
THESE GUIDELINES AND ASSUMES NO LIABILITY OF ANY KIND WHATSOEVER RESULTING
FROM THE USE OR RELIANCE UPON THEIR CONTENTS. PLEASE BE ADVISED THAT: (I) ONE OR
MORE OF THE MEASUREMENT PROCESSES DESCRIBED HEREIN MAY BE SUBJECT TO
PATENTS; (II) IAB TECH LAB HAS PERFORMED NO DILIGENCE AND HAS NOT ANALYZED THE
VALIDITY OF ANY OF THESE PATENTS; (III) IAB TECH LAB IS NOT PROMULGATING ANY
STANDARDS OR SPECIFICATIONS UNDER THESE GUIDELINES; AND (IV) PRIOR TO
IMPLEMENTING ANY MEASUREMENT PROCESSES DESCRIBED HEREIN, YOU ARE SOLELY
RESPONSIBLE FOR CONDUCTING ANY SUCH DILIGENCE AND ANALYSES AND/OR LICENSING
ANY NECESSARY PATENTS.
Please contact support@iabtechlab.com if you have any questions or comments about this
document. This document and other related resources can be found on the IAB Tech Lab
website at: https://iabtechlab.com/standards/podcast-measurement-guidelines/
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 2 of 29

Contributing Member Companies
The IAB Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines document was developed by the IAB Tech
Lab Podcast Technical Working Group, in partnership with the IAB Audio Committee. The
following IAB Tech Lab member companies contributed to the update of this document:
●
A+E Networks
●
Acast
●
ACPM
●
Ad Results Media
●
Adelaide
●
AdLarge Media
●
AdsWizz
●
Algorix
●
ART19
●
Audacy
●
Audio Alliance
GmbH
●
Audion
●
Audit Bureau of
Circulations UK
●
Barometer
●
Barstool Sports
●
CBC Radio
Canada
●
Centillion
●
Chartable
●
Dailymotion
●
Doceree
●
DoubleVerify
●
Epsilon
●
ESPN
●
Experian Marketing
Services
●
Extreme Reach
●
Global Media &
Entertainment
●
Google LLC
●
GroupM US
●
Hearst
●
Hubhopper
●
IAB Germany
●
IAB Tech Lab
●
IAB UK
●
iHeartMedia
●
Julep Media GmbH
●
Jun Group
●
Kantar Media
Sweden AB
●
Katz Media Group
●
Kinesso
●
Libsyn
●
Lucid
●
Magellan AI
●
Media.net
Advertising FZ LLC
●
National Public
Media
●
NBCUniversal
●
New York Public
Radio
●
News UK
●
Nexxen
●
Nielsen
●
Nova
Entertainment
●
NPR
●
Omny Studio
●
Oracle Advertising
& Customer
Experience
●
Paramount
●
Podigee GmbH
●
Podscribe
●
Podtrac
●
Protected Media
●
Publicis Media
●
Pyler Co., Ltd
●
RawVoice
●
Rebel Base Media
●
Remixd
●
ResponsiveAds
●
SiriusXM Media
●
Slate
●
Sony Music
Entertainment
●
Sounder
●
Sounds Profitable
●
Soundstack
●
Spreaker
●
StackAdapt
●
The Daily Wire
●
The Inquirer
●
The New York
Times Company
●
The Trade Desk
●
TripleLift
●
Triton Digital
●
Veritonic
●
VRTCAL
●
Warner Bros.
Discovery
●
Westwood One
●
WideOrbit
●
Xaxis
A list of current members subscribed to the Podcast Technical Working Group can be found at
https://iabtechlab.com/working-groups/podcast-technical-working-group/
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 3 of 29

Table of Contents
1. Executive Summary.......................................................................6
1.1 About Compliance................................................................................... 7
1.2 Who Should Read These Guidelines?................................................... 7
1.3 About this Version................................................................................... 7
2. Overview..........................................................................................8
2.1 The Advantage of Podcast Syndication.................................................9
2.2 Scope......................................................................................................... 9
3. The Podcast Medium – Content Delivery.................................. 10
3.1 Downloaded Podcasts............................................................................10
3.2 Progressively Downloaded Podcasts.................................................. 10
3.2.1 Raw Server Logs for Progressive Downloads...................................11
4. The Podcast Medium – Ad Delivery........................................... 11
4.2 Integrated Ads........................................................................................ 11
4.3 Dynamically Inserted Ads.......................................................................11
4.4 Sponsorship Ads..............................................................................................................11
5. Podcast Measurement Process..................................................12
5.1 Measurement with Server Logs............................................................12
5.2 Measurement Using a URL Prefix.........................................................13
5.3 Invalid Traffic..........................................................................................13
5.4 Recommended Process for Measurement.......................................... 14
5.4.1 Measurement Window................................................................................ 15
5.4.2 Step 1: Filtering...........................................................................................15
Step 1.1: Eliminate Pre-Load Requests......................................................... 15
Step 1.2: Eliminate Potential Bots and Bogus Requests................................15
Step 1.3: Handling HTTP Requests............................................................... 17
5.4.3 Step 2: Apply File Threshold Levels........................................................... 17
5.4.4 Step 3: Identify and aggregate uniques...................................................... 18
Working with IPv6 Addresses.........................................................................19
5.4.5 Step 4: Generate Metrics............................................................................ 20
5.4.6 Step 5. Audit the Process........................................................................... 20
6. Podcast Metric Definitions...........................................................21
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 4 of 29

6.1 Podcast Content Delivery Metric Definitions....................................... 21
6.2 Podcast Audience Metric Definitions....................................................21
6.3 Podcast Ad Metric Definitions............................................................... 23
6.4 Higher Level or Advanced Metrics........................................................ 24
7. Podcast Player Recommendations.............................................25
7.2 Agent Structure.......................................................................................26
8. A Use Case in Changing Technology........................................ 27
8.1 Apple watchOS Duplicate Downloads.................................................. 27
8.2 Accounting for Changes in Technology............................................... 28
9. In Closing...................................................................................... 29
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 5 of 29

1.
Executive Summary
Podcast audiences represent a growing segment of effective marketable media. Podcast ad
revenues are expected to reach over $4 Billion by 2025—more than double posted revenues in
2022--according to the IAB Podcast Advertising Revenue Study conducted by PwC US and
posted May 2023. Podcasts offer advertisers hyper-focused audiences that remain attentive
even during ads. Podcast listeners have been shown to be the most loyal and engaged
audience of any digital medium.
The stakes for revenue in podcasting are growing, and the need to attract buyers will become
more competitive over time. To foster a fair market for podcast businesses, IAB Tech Lab and
the Podcast Technical Measurement Working Group developed and maintains guidelines for
metrics used in podcasting.
Measuring performance in podcast advertising is unique in the market of digital advertising.
Podcast episodes are downloaded for consumption and measurement is based on server logs.
This is in contrast to other digital mediums that typically maintain an open connection between a
consumer’s device and the content server. This nuance produces different metrics in podcast
advertising.
The challenge for podcast producers and distributors is to offer buyers a set of metrics that is
consistently defined and measured equally across the podcast medium. This document
provides an overview of ad delivery in podcasting and describes the technical process for
measuring: downloads, audience, and ad delivery. IAB Tech Lab also offers a compliance
program for companies who wish to signal to buyers their adherence to these guidelines.
With a consistent set of podcast advertising metrics, buyers and sellers can engage in a
conversation about campaign strategy with confidence.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 6 of 29

1.1
About Compliance
This document informs the Podcast Compliance Program provided by IAB Tech Lab.
However, because the Podcast Technical Measurement Working Group defines these
guidelines, and because many of the member companies go through the compliance
process, the Compliance Program must be defined separately to gain the trust of buyers
and meet basic expectations for third-party certification.
To claim compliance with these guidelines, an organization must go through the IAB
Tech Lab certification process and get listed on the IAB Tech Lab website.
To learn more about Tech Lab’s Compliance Program, visit:
https://iabtechlab.com/compliance-programs/podcast-measurement-compliance/
For a list of compliant podcast companies, visit:
https://iabtechlab.com/compliance-programs/compliant-companies/#podcast
1.2
Who Should Read These Guidelines?
While all professionals in the podcast supply chain can benefit by being familiar with this
document, metric definitions are primarily intended for podcast producers and distributors who
provide measurement services. Specifically, account managers should be familiar with and use
metrics as defined in this document when negotiating ad packages with buyers. Additionally,
publishers and podcast hosting platforms should use the metric definitions in this document to
design or adjust the ad measurement technology they use to analyze server logs for podcast ad
measurement. Podcast creator organizations should also familiarize themselves with these
guidelines to understand how ad measurement for their content is accomplished when they
partner with a compliant podcast publishing service.
Buyers should also reference this document to better understand how ads placed in podcast
content are counted. This document offers a set of metrics that establish a mutual
understanding in podcast advertising negotiations.
1.3
About this Version
The first version of this document was released in September 2016. Additional significant
updates were made with version 2.0 released in December 2017. Updates in version 2.1,
released in 2021, included language edits for more clarity, a new section with guidance on user
agent structure, recommendations for IPv6 IP addresses, filtering guidance for Apple watchOS
user agents, and a number of additional podcast player recommendations.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 7 of 29

Updates in version 2.2 (this version):
●
Added disclaimer language to highlight that patents might be involved in the
processes we recommend and that it’s up to each company to do “due diligence”
on finding such patents and seeking appropriate licenses where necessary.
●
Clarified the difference between measurement using a redirect for downloads and
measurement based on complete server logs for downloads. Section 5.2
●
Added language to explain invalid traffic and the difference between general
invalid traffic (GIVT) and sophisticated invalid traffic (SIVT). Section 5.3
●
Clarified that an ad can only be counted as valid if it’s part of a valid download.
●
Described how a “fixed” measurement window and a “rolling” measurement
window impact results, and the need to declare which method the company is
using. Section 5.4.1
●
Divided the Podcast Measurement section into two parts: one for the
measurement process and one for the metrics. Note in Section 5.4.2
●
Applied a numbering scheme to simplify cross-reference.
●
Included language about using a document of methodology (DOM) to be
transparent about specific methods (in sections where relevant)
●
Moved player recommendations from the appendix to the main doc to support
player companies working with podcast publishers and distributors. Section 7
●
Moved the requirement to filter out downloads by a UA for Apple Watch from
addendum to body of the guidelines for filtering process. Section 5.4.2, Step 1.2.
●
Included a more broad requirement to account for changes in technology and
signaling that might impact measurement. Section 8.2
2. Overview
Podcast content is an on-demand media format that listeners either download to
listen to later or consume online. Unlike the streaming format more common in
video, podcasts continue to be downloaded because of the convenience offered
by existing platform and application functionality.
Despite the use of the word “streaming” in podcasting, "streamed" podcast files
are progressively downloaded via the standard HTTP protocol.
The delivery of a streamed podcast is logged the same way as a downloaded file
in the server logs. This important distinction impacts the ability to measure content
and ad delivery in real-time without access to client-side analytics. Podcast
publishers must work around this limitation and track metrics using server log
data.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 8 of 29

2.1
The Advantage of Podcast Syndication
Podcast consumption relies on and benefits from a fragmented ecosystem. This
fragmentation allows consumers to access podcasts wherever they want - with any
podcast app or on websites offering to consume podcasts. Podcast creators and
advertisers benefit by being able to reach a larger audience compared to an ecosystem
limited to only one place of consumption.
The ability to track podcast content and ad playback largely depends on the player
requesting the file. Podcast aggregator apps, like Apple Podcasts and Spotify, typically
do not send playback data to publishers. Host-branded players (players owned by the
podcast producers) can provide playback data for podcasts consumed using their
branded app; however, this playback data represents limited reach because the majority
of listeners prefer aggregator apps over host-branded ones.
Despite the limitations, podcast audiences are growing and offer valuable exposure for
marketers. In order to offer this value to buyers, metrics must be consistently defined
across the industry. IAB Tech Lab collaborates with the podcasting community to
establish and maintain metric definitions that can be used consistently in the podcast
marketplace.
Establishing consensus and clarity for podcast reporting metrics improves
communication and establishes trust and accountability with buyers.
2.2
Scope
This document defines content, ad, and audience metrics in the context of
downloaded podcasts whether saved for later listening or listened to while being
downloaded. In this context, both formats are typically pre-recorded and available
on demand whenever the listener is ready to access the files.
Podcasts that use true streaming technology offer the ability to track activity in
real-time or near real-time with “client-confirmed ad delivery.” We cover this one
metric as part of the measurement guidance provided in this document. Additional
measurement guidance for true streaming audio is covered in the MRC Audio
Measurement Guidelines released January 2018. However, the percentage of
market share for true streaming apps is too small to represent true performance in
a podcast campaign. A well-rounded analysis of podcast measurement includes
metrics for ad delivery in a medium with limited client-confirmed playback data.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 9 of 29

For the sake of establishing common ground in tracking podcast performance, the
definitions presented in this document focus on counting ad delivery in
downloaded and progressively downloaded podcast episodes. This count comes
from analyzing server logs to determine what was actually delivered.
3.
The Podcast Medium – Content Delivery
Podcast listeners acquire podcast files in one of two ways: either by downloading the
file for later listening (downloaded), or by listening while the file is downloaded
(progressively downloaded). To a lesser degree, some podcasts may also be played
while a persistent connection to the server is maintained (streamed), but the market
share for applications that support this format is insignificant for campaign measurement
and excluded from discussion here.
Delivery methods for downloaded files, whether listened to later or during download,
offer valuable inventory to advertisers, but content and ad delivery are handled
differently in both environments. An overview of each format is explained in the following
paragraphs. Despite different tracking capabilities in each environment, a few baseline
metrics should be able to offer similar reports for both podcast types.
3.1
Downloaded Podcasts
Podcast downloading allows the audience to download full episodes of content that can
be played at a later date and time. Listeners may subscribe to select programs, and
platforms like Apple Podcasts continue to support full downloads to a personal library
for listening offline at any time in the future. The convenience of this system makes
downloaded podcasts a continued preference among listeners.
3.2
Progressively Downloaded Podcasts
These podcasts appear to be streamed, but the file is actually being downloaded while
the listener is listening to the file. The downloaded file is stored in a temporary location
rather than to a library as with a downloaded podcast. Since progressively downloaded
files are typically downloaded the same way as the files stored for later listening,
delivery for these two formats are recorded the same way in the server logs. The only
difference between the two is whether the listener is actively playing the file as it is
downloaded or being saved for later listening - which can only be discerned by the
player.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 10 of 29

3.2.1
Raw Server Logs for Progressive Downloads
In a downloaded file, segments of the file are collected on the listener’s device, or
progressively downloaded. These progressively downloaded files result in a server log
with several requests to the server, which must then be analyzed and filtered from other
server requests in order to represent how many files were downloaded and to what
audiences. When podcast publishers use a consistent process, metrics can be reported
and trusted with a high level of confidence.
4.
The Podcast Medium – Ad Delivery
Podcast ads can be delivered and tracked in a variety of different ways, but in general
two different methods are used with variations on each.
4.2
Integrated Ads
Historically, podcasting ad campaigns often involved ads that were read by the podcast
host or a familiar voice. A static ad or jingle may be also included as part of the file.
These ads are part of the content and included, or “baked-in,” with the file that is
downloaded. Targeting is limited because everyone who downloads the file gets the
same ads.
4.3
Dynamically Inserted Ads
In recent years, ad technology has allowed for ads to be targeted and dynamically
inserted at the time of file request (rather than recorded directly into the audio file). The ad
server determines the best ad to serve to the listener at the time of request. In a
podcast consumed online, ads may be inserted into a file that is being progressively
downloaded at designated ad breaks.
4.4
Sponsorship Ads
Ads that directly sponsor a podcast episode have typically been host-read, or integrated
as described in 4.2 above. However, with today’s technology and business models,
sponsorships can be dynamically inserted as described in 4.3.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 11 of 29

5.
Podcast Measurement Process1
Most players that initiate a podcast download (client) send no information about
playback, which is in contrast to other IP-connected mediums that rely on client signals
to confirm the ad was received. In podcast measurement ad play is calculated based on
server logs that provide information about what was served.
5.1
Measurement with Server Logs
In order to produce accurate counts for podcast downloads and ads, podcast hosting,
measurement, and monetization companies must analyze server logs. These server
logs may include file requests for a combination of downloaded podcast files,
dynamically inserted ads, and any content requested by the web page or application
hosting the player. HTTP GET requests usually contain the following data:
●
IP Address - The IP address is one of the factors that may be used to determine
if the request is unique or a duplicate, except when the IP address is of known
corporate offices, dorms, and other IP-connected setups where multiple people
share one IP address. The IP address is also used to determine geographical
information on where the podcast is downloaded. Both IPv4 and IPv6 IP formats
are accounted for in measurement data outlined in this guidance.
●
Time Stamp - The date and time is used to define a 24-hour window (either by
calendar day or rolling 24 hours) in which downloads are filtered for duplicates.
●
HTTP Status Code - The appropriate HTTP status code is examined to
determine if the request should be counted.
●
Bytes Served - only available in native server logs, the bytes served value may
be used to determine how much of the podcast was downloaded.
●
Referrer - The origin of the download, if available, provides details about the
download, such as whether the content was auto-played (in which case the
download would be removed or reported).
●
User Agent - The identifier for the app or service consuming the media, which
helps to determine if the download request is unique.
●
Byte Range - The range of bytes requested in a given request, used to
determine what portion of the media is requested. A low byte range may signal a
pre-download which is excluded from valid counts.
1 Please be advised that: (i) one or more of the measurement processes described herein may be subject
to patents; (ii) IAB Tech Lab has performed no diligence and has not analyzed the validity of any of these
patents; (iii) IAB Tech Lab is not promulgating any standards or specifications under these guidelines;
and (iv) prior to implementing any measurement processes described herein, you are solely responsible
for conducting any such diligence and analyses and/or licensing any necessary patents.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 12 of 29

When analyzed across multiple requests, filtered log data offers statistics that represent
podcast downloads, audience and ad delivery. Since media technology is always
changing, no specific combination of factors or techniques will offer the most accurate
count indefinitely. However, meeting some minimum requirements and following some
best practices will help produce more consistent results across providers and platforms.
This guidance outlines best practices for filtering server logs for measurement and
defines specific metrics for podcast content measurement, audience measurement, and
ad measurement. Podcast producers and distributors may include additional metrics
beyond the ones defined here, but such additional metrics should be labeled separately
from the core list of IAB Tech Lab metrics.
5.2
Measurement Using a URL Prefix
Measurement can be done by appending a prefix to the download URL, collecting most
of the data elements listed above for the GET requests, and counting how many times
that prefix was used to trigger a download. This method of measurement tracks the
download request, but not the server response.
For example, a prefix measurement vendor may not be able to discern how much of the
file was downloaded because it can’t directly gather data on how many bytes were
consumed. The vendor may be able to obtain this information from other sources, but
the results will vary from measurement using filtered server log data that include bytes
served.
Validation of this measurement method is distinct from working with podcast hosting
platform server logs and must be proven to meet the recommendations provided in this
document. For example, partial download removal might be accomplished by
comparing prefix measurement counts to server log data from either the vendor’s own
first-party server logs or a partner’s first-party server logs.
5.3
Invalid Traffic
In podcasting, downloads generated by bots or other systems that will not be heard are
considered invalid traffic. In all advertising mediums, invalid traffic (IVT) can be broken down
into two categories: general and sophisticated.
General IVT is generated by crawlers (bots, spiders, etc.), known data centers, pre-fetching,
and other general routine practices that can be easily filtered from logged data using common
practices and technology that identifies general IVT.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 13 of 29

Sophisticated IVT, on the other hand, is more difficult to detect because it’s intended to look like
human traffic, and in most cases, is fraud. This kind of traffic is generated using hijacked
devices, bots designed to mimic human traffic, by manipulating data, or using other technology
and tactics to generate false audiences for advertising. The public version of this guideline will
not offer specific guidance on what to filter because the organizations generating this kind of
IVT might read that same guidance and adjust their strategies. That said, your organization can
implement practices that look for anomalies in the data and address them as appropriate.
Valid measurement outlined in this document includes filtering recommendations aimed at
minimizing invalid traffic. While more data is needed to set specific thresholds for measurement
compliance, the filtering guidance offered here will catch most general IVT and some of the
more obvious sophisticated IVT. Companies trying to catch more sophisticated IVT can look to
additional resources and services for a higher level of accountability to their customers and
partners.
5.4
Recommended Process for Measurement
While we have made the effort to be specific with our guidance on filtering server log
data for measurement, publishers and distributors will have to consider best practices to
align with their circumstances. For certification, metrics providers must support the
process outlined in this document to the best of their ability, or follow a process with a
similar or more stringent level of analysis, disclose the options selected, disclose where
they diverge from the guidance in this document, and provide the rationale or
circumstances that drove those decisions.
To claim compliance with these guidelines, an organization must go through the IAB
certification process and get listed on the IAB Tech Lab website:
https://iabtechlab.com/compliance-programs/compliant-companies/#podcast
We recommend a 5-step process to generating metrics using server side log analysis.
1. Apply filtering logic
2. Apply file threshold logic
3. Identify and aggregate uniques
4. Generate metrics
5. Audit the process (feedback loop)
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 14 of 29

5.4.1
Measurement Window
Measurement is calculated for data within a 24 hour window. This 24 hour window can
be a calendar day (fixed) or a rolling 24 hour window. Using a rolling 24 hour window
can be more complicated, but the data will be more accurate. For example, using a
fixed 24 hour window to count a download that spans the boundary of that fixed window
means that part of the download happens on the first day and the rest of the download
happens on the second day, which may result in counting the download twice. A rolling
24 hour window would only count that download once. Over the span of a few days,
these discrepancies don’t amount to much, but over longer periods of time the counting
discrepancy between the two methodologies becomes more significant.
A company being certified under this guidance must disclose, in a corporate document
of methodology (DOM), whether they use a fixed 24 hour window or a rolling 24 hour
window for measurement.
5.4.2
Step 1: Filtering
All requests that should not be counted for any reason should be filtered out up front.
The criteria we have identified for filtering are listed below.
Step 1.1: Eliminate Pre-Load Requests
Pre-loading of podcasts directly results in podcast downloads being counted when they
should not. There are two possible solutions to handle this.
●
Policy put in place to not allow preloading in players and on websites (e.g.
preload=none for HTML5)
●
Use a download threshold based on one minute of content, excluding any data
used for headers or other information, to determine if request was for a
play/download or for pre-loading (see Step 2 “Apply file threshold levels”
below)
Look for evidence of pre-loading in the logfile data. If found, try to identify the source of
the pre-loading, then contact the business responsible and ask them to correct the
behavior.
Step 1.2: Eliminate Potential Bots and Bogus Requests
A number of scenarios include requests that should not be counted because they likely
come from bots or from systems designed to mimic human behavior for downloads.
This step is a first defense against general invalid traffic.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 15 of 29

Metrics providers must filter out the following:
1. IP addresses that cannot originate to actual listeners (such as known servers
instead of listener devices).
2. IP addresses that account for a large number of downloads in the 24 hour period
used by the metrics provider. Large numbers of downloads that represent an
unrealistic number of downloads for a single listener should be examined for
potential fraud. (But also look at the safe IP addresses note below.)
3. IP addresses that are identified from sources that are not actual listeners (such as
requests that come from known bots, data centers, VPN traffic, or other
non-human sources.)
4. Erroneous referrer data. Referrer data is rarely available, but it provides valuable
information when it is. For example, accurate referrer data can imply that certain
sources are not actual listeners. Check for accuracy on any available referrer
data.
5. Malformed user agents. For example, a legitimate Firefox version number is
55.0.2. However, a bogus user agent could use the device label “Firefox 55.02”
which only lacks a period “.” separator between 0 and 2 and looks like a
legitimate user agent. This could be an error or intentional. Be wary of malformed
user agents, which prevent proper filtering. If simply malformed, then correct, and
if intentionally false, filter them out.
6. User Agents that identify to be from sources that are not actual listeners (e.g. bots
that self identify as being bots)
7. Some apps perform a 2 byte range request (Range: 0-1) to check if the media file
can be downloaded using byte range requests. This kind of request is often
immediately followed by 1 or more additional range requests. Disregard any 2
byte (0-1 byte) range requests. These requests don’t represent a valid download.
8. Duplicates on paired Apple Watch devices indicated by UA’s that begin with atc/
and include watchOS (/for example atc/1.0 watchOS/), or UA’s that contain
(null)/(null) watchOS
Note: Known “safe” IP Addresses (dorms, corporations, etc.) should be maintained
in an inclusion-list and be allowed for counting. These inclusion lists must be
re-validated at least every 90 days since IP addresses may not be static. Keep a
record of list re-validation to share with customers and partners to indicate efforts for
combating invalid traffic.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 16 of 29

Step 1.3: Handling HTTP Requests
Different types of HTTP requests indicate different kinds of behavior in the server logs.
HTTP requests in the server logs should be handled as follows:
1. HEAD requests: typically used to check for changes. No data is transferred in a
HEAD request, so these requests should be excluded.
2. GET requests:
a. 200 (ok response): valid count for downloads
b. 206 (partial response): only count if the download covers the 1 minute rule
defined in 1.2 above, and de-duplication based on IP Address/UA to cover
cases where the listener might be skipping ahead. Determining whether
the requests cover the 1-minute requirement might require reassembling
requests.
c. 304 (not modified response) -> signal that the user has an existing file and
wants to see if it changed. These should not be counted.
3. There may also be platform specific quirks to watch for. For example, Akamai
uses a HTTP code of 000 for 206 requests that ended prematurely. These
requests can only be counted if they pass all measurement filters.
5.4.3
Step 2: Apply File Threshold Levels
Downloads below a certain size are unlikely to result in human consumption because
too little of the file was received to listen to any content. The following rules help
eliminate the downloads that are too small to be counted.
1. To count as a valid download, the header information plus enough of the
podcast content to play for 1 minute should have been downloaded.
2. ID3 size recommendation – since the ID3 file size can vary quite significantly,
each publisher should measure the ID3 tag file size for each podcast. To be more
efficient in cases where the ID3 size doesn’t change, the publisher could set a
size for the show/program and whenever the artwork changes, re-calculate the
size.
3. Content size recommendation – the size of the download for 1 minute of content
will vary based on the bitrate used and the amount of bytes ID3 headers
consume. The publisher must calculate this size for each episode.
This step requires a continuous monitoring of the podcasts as each episode gets
served.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 17 of 29

Alternatively, if the podcast episode is shorter than 1 minute or if it isn’t possible to
compute the file and ID3 sizes regularly, complete file downloads (100% of the file,
including the ID3 tag or other header information) should be used.
Note: One minute was chosen as a conservative minimum size since other
mediums use similar or smaller thresholds.
Note: When byte range request data is not available, more advanced algorithms
that factor in a correction for partially downloaded content may be used. Such a
system must disclose how their system overcomes not having the byte range data.
5.4.4 Step 3: Identify and aggregate uniques
Once filtering is completed, requests should be aggregated to identify uniques in the
following two scenarios.
Scenario 1: Identifying Uniques (for Downloads & Listeners):
Identifying unique requests is important in counting downloads for an episode
and in counting audience size. The standard way to sort downloads and remove
duplicates is to match an IP address with a user agent (UA); however, additional
metadata may be available for the download and may help further reduce
duplicate downloads. Details for all methods should be made transparent.
First, filter using IP address + user agent (UA); then filter using additional
metadata if available.
Filter for IP Address + UA with the following considerations:
●
A combination of IP Address + UA is used to identify unique listeners and
downloads. For example, if the same file is downloaded 10 times by 6
user agents behind one IP address within a 24 hour window, that would
count as 6 listeners and 6 downloads.
●
This method requires some technique to constrain counts for a maintained
exclusion-list for blocking IP addresses that excessively download/play at
a rate that is not feasible.
●
To better support known high density IP Addresses (dorms, corporations,
etc.), an inclusion-list of IP Addresses may also be maintained. For these
IP Addresses, different filtering rules may be needed to account for a
concentration of similar devices.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 18 of 29

Scenario 1 (continued): Identifying Uniques (for Downloads & Listeners):
Filter for Additional Metadata
Companies can filter using additional metadata if available. When using
additional sources of data, these companies must be transparent about what
metadata is being used.
Examples of additional metadata may include:
●
UserId
●
Cookie or similar identifier
●
X-playback sessionID
Scenario 2: Play-Pause-Play Scenarios
If a unique download is divided into multiple file requests, for example if a listener
plays the first half of an episode using a website audio player, clicks pause, and
then resumes an hour later, that counts as one unique download.
Regardless of the use case and the metadata used to filter for uniques,
companies must be transparent in their methods by communicating their
methods in a corporate description of methodology (DOM).
Working with IPv6 Addresses
The members of the Podcast Technical Working Group recognize that measuring
unique devices assigned with IPv6 addresses poses certain challenges. IPv6 addresses
are not static, and multiple new addresses are cycled on a single device in a given time
period. Without special consideration, this feature of IPv6 addresses could result in
inflated metrics, and could also impact frequency capping of ad campaigns.
The Podcast Technical Working Group has researched methods to address potential
discrepancies attributed to IPv6 measurements to define the following treatment for
IPv6 based measurements.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 19 of 29

The best way to handle IPv6 addresses is to truncate it to its first 64 bits before
calculating. The IP addresses used in calculating metrics is a combination of full IPv4
IP addresses along with partial IPv6 addresses truncated to 64 bits.
Note: IPv4 or partial IPv6 addresses can be hashed for privacy reasons without
affecting the above formulas. Truncating IPv6 addresses to 64 bits may result in a
few duplicated listeners; however, our research has shown that results are
comparable to the results for non-truncated IPv4 calculations. Ultimately, metrics
providers must be transparent about the methodology used.
5.4.5
Step 4: Generate Metrics
Once the requests have gone through the filtering process above and uniques have
been identified, generate the metrics defined in section 6, as well as any additional /
custom metrics supported. The metrics should be formatted, and delivered according to
each company’s process and policy, using their choice of analytics technology.
5.4.6
Step 5. Audit the Process
The goal of this section is to allow for adjustments to metrics generation. Measurement
platforms must watch for behavior that indicates diminished quality of the metrics, and
investigate the source of potential errors or fraud.
The entire process must be self-audited and reported in a corporate document of
methodology at least twice a year. Anomalies, such as uncharacteristic spikes or drops
in data, should be identified and metrics adjusted based on deeper investigation.
Future cycles of metrics generation should factor in any learnings from each run. For
example, if certain IP addresses are identified as generating downloads not intended for
human consumption, downloads from those IP addresses must be removed from
current metric generation, and the IP address must be added to an exclusion list for
future metrics generation.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 20 of 29

6. Podcast Metric Definitions
Since podcast ads are so closely integrated with podcast content, metrics that measure
content are vital to ad measurement in podcasting.
Show producers, executives, marketing, and digital product teams are interested in the
following questions:
●
Audience: How many people are downloading my network/show/episode?
●
Downloads: How many times is my network/show/episode downloaded and
potentially listened to, at least in part?
Podcast metrics are broken down into 4 categories:
1. Podcast Content Delivery
2. Podcast Audience
3. Podcast Ad
4. Higher Level or Advanced
The metrics for each category are defined in the following sections.
6.1
Podcast Content Delivery Metric Definitions
The following metric is used to describe content downloads. Server log analysis for
content delivery must filter data to produce metrics as defined below.
1. Download: a unique file request that was downloaded. This includes complete
file downloads as well as partial downloads in accordance with the rules
described in section 5, which outlines the filtering process for measurement.
6.2
Podcast Audience Metric Definitions
Podcast listeners often download more than one episode and often from more than one
podcast. A measure of how many people downloaded episodes can be used to
describe the reach of the podcast or group of podcasts.
HTTP requests include the IP address of the client receiving the file and usually include
a user agent that, while not unique to the listener, provides some ability to distinguish
multiple listeners behind one IP address.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 21 of 29

2. Listener: data that represents a single user who downloads content (for
immediate or delayed consumption). Listeners are represented by the unique
combination of IP address and User Agent as described in section 5, step 3.
Listeners must be specified within a stated time frame (day, week, month, etc.).
Note: The nature of podcast consumption involves listeners on mobile devices,
which means that the IP addresses change frequently for each listener, or what
we call “IP-hopping.” IP-hopping can result in double counting listeners, but IP
addresses can also be recycled, resulting in undercounting listeners. These
factors can be difficult to account for. Shorter time frames can produce better
results while longer time frames exacerbate the issue. The time frame within
which counts are provided should be disclosed to customers.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 22 of 29

Listener metric using IPv6 Addresses
The best way to handle IPv6 addresses is to truncate it to its first 64 bits before
calculating the listener metric, which is a combination of IP + UA. Please see Working
with IPv6 Addresses under Step 3 of the filtering process for details.
Listener = Count of Unique (IP* + UA)
*Either the full IPv4 or a partial IPv6 (prefix 64 bits).
6.3
Podcast Ad Metric Definitions
The following metrics represent the first step toward improved ad measurement in
podcast advertising. These metrics are derived using the content metrics defined above.
As these metrics become adopted in the industry, additional steps can be made toward
an improved podcasting ecosystem.
3. Ad Delivered: an ad that was delivered as determined by filtered server logs for
validated downloads that show either all bytes of the ad file were sent or the
bytes representing the portion of the podcast file containing the ad file was
downloaded.
For example, if an ad was included within the first 25% of a podcast and at least
25% of the podcast file was downloaded, then the ad can be counted as
delivered.
When ads are dynamically inserted into the podcast file or within an ad break
within the podcast, 100% of the ad content (all bytes) must be downloaded
before it may be counted as delivered.
Note: An ad can only ever be counted as “ad delivered” if the download it
belongs to is determined to be valid. For example, if a 30 second pre-roll ad
was included in a download that never got 1 full min downloaded, the ad
cannot be counted as valid even if the ad itself was fully downloaded.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 23 of 29

4. Client-Confirmed Ad Play: counts an ad that was able to prompt a tracking
beacon from the client when the file was played. Whenever possible, metric
should include information about how much of the ad was played using the
markers: ad start, first quartile (25%), midpoint (50%), third quartile (75%), and
complete (100%).
While the client-confirmed ad play metric represents the most accurate count for
ad plays in a podcast, it requires client-side tracking. As discussed earlier, the
platforms used to download, store, and play podcast files lack or prevent the
availability of client-confirmed metrics. The IAB Tech Lab will continue working
with player platforms to get more access to client side beacons.
6.4
Higher Level or Advanced Metrics
All the metrics described in previous sections were written with a focus on episode level
analysis. The content and ad delivered metrics described above could be applied at 3
levels: publisher, show, and episode.
Client-side tracking or access to some sort of listener ID–for example using cookies or
using an Identifier For Advertising (IFA)–would be ideal for tracking audiences over
time, but this can be approximated using analytical methods as described below.
If metrics providers have the ability to identify the listener, they should indicate the
mechanism used to identify listeners and provide metrics (downloads, listeners and any
other additional metrics supported) at the show and publisher level in order to provide a
better picture of that podcast's reach.
Lacking a listener ID, building metrics can be done using one of the following options:
1. Sum the metrics across podcast episodes.
Acceptable if the goal is to just count the total number of unique downloads, but
does not provide a view of the listener base due to audience overlap.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 24 of 29

2. Use the IP Address & UA to identify and track listeners.
Provides a better view of the listener base, with certain limitations:
●
The IP Address for a listener could change – especially in the case of a
mobile listener – at which point there is no way to correlate the 2 IP
addresses
●
Using UA helps differentiate multiple listeners from an IP address, but
breaks down when multiple listeners from an IP have the same kind of
device/UA (as is somewhat common in corporate and educational
settings)
The above two negatives likely counteract each other over time, but any
innovation to better handle these limitations are welcomed.
7. Podcast Player Recommendations
Companies that provide a player for downloaded podcast episodes can impact server
logs used for determining metrics. We recommend the following guidelines for player set
up and operations to minimize any impact on podcast measurement.
1. Do not implement auto-play except where listener intent is implied. For example,
if a listener initiates play for an episode in their podcast player, the expectation is
that the next episode will auto-play when the selected episode is complete. In
contrast when a set-up that initiates auto-play upon a page visit or opening an
app without any other actions to indicate intent, the result is a bad experience for
the listener and inflates measurement metrics to include unwanted audio play.
2. Do not preload podcast episodes unless the intent was clearly to play the
podcast.
3. Use header information located at the start of the podcast to prevent a full
download when not needed.
4. For a full download, ask for the entire file at once. For a progressive download,
ask for the file in slices at a byte range that is more than 2 bytes at a time. This
way a full download can be distinguished from a progressive download.
5. Do not modify the enclosure URL when requesting media or add extra
parameters.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 25 of 29

6. Do not cache podcast episodes on your servers. Always download the latest
episode from the enclosure URL for every app listener initiating a download.
7. Use the GUID—as opposed to episode URL, title, publication date, etc.—to
identify new episodes in the RSS feed that should be automatically downloaded
to a listener’s device. The GUID is designed to be persistent regardless of
changes to hosting environments, titles, or other details.
8. Employ an “automatic download unsubscribe” behavior. For example, after a
number of inactive downloads (episodes never played), stop auto downloading
additional episodes.
9. Do not automatically download all episodes (e.g. back catalog episodes) by
default. This behavior creates unnecessary drain on the publishers’ servers as
well as consuming listeners’ bandwidth. It also creates a spike in downloads on
server logs that require resources for troubleshooting the spike, explaining it, and
addressing it.
10.Provide enough details in the user-agent header to allow it to be consistently
differentiated from the user agent of other devices. See “User Agent Structure”
below.
In addition to listener experience issues and slowing down the websites, if these
guidelines are not followed, measurement companies may decide to discount ALL the
traffic from these apps/sites because they cannot count true downloads or plays.
7.2
Agent Structure
Device platform providers and app developers used to play podcast episodes should
provide enough details in the user-agent header so that it can be consistently
differentiated from the user agent of other devices. Using the following pattern to build
the user-agent will offer a consistent structure for all parties who consume the details:
<app name>/<app version> <device info> <os name>/<os version><other info>
For example:
AppName/1.2.3 DeviceBrand DeviceModel OSName/1.2.3 LibName/1.2.3
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 26 of 29

Whenever possible the above user agent structure should be applied to both RSS feeds
and audio files.
We recommend that OS hosts should allow the user agent to be modifiable when using
their libraries. Player platforms should be conservative about adding unnecessary
information to the user-agent string and as part of their encoding practices. For
example, refrain from injecting user or session IDs into the user-agent string. 
We also recommend that platforms submit their user-agent header value to the IAB
Tech Lab Spiders and Bots inclusion list so that it is not considered a bot, enabling the
signal to be used for determining device information. If the app or platform uses bots to
index content, the user-agent should be specified in a way that is distinct from the
application user-agent and should also include the word “bot” to clearly identify its use
case.
8.
A Use Case in Changing Technology
Certified companies put practices in place to watch for anomalous changes that impact
measurement. The Podcast Technical Measurement Working Group with IAB Tech Lab
includes companies that look at podcast download measurement on a daily basis.
When they see a significant anomaly in their reports, they bring it to the attention of the
Working Group and enter a process for discovering what is causing the anomaly and
what to do about it.
The below use case demonstrates an example of a shift in technology and how the
Working Group addressed the issue.
8.1
Apple watchOS Duplicate Downloads
Podcast server logs can be impacted when podcast player apps introduce new
behaviors or updates. For example, wearable computing devices, such as a smart
watch, may duplicate downloads for the paired phone device. Filtering for the known
user agent helps metric providers remove the duplicate downloads. However, an update
that changes how that user agent is made known may cause a spike in downloads. This
exact case happened when Apple changed how it labeled the User Agent for Apple
Watch.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 27 of 29

In 2020, Apple Watch changed metadata conventions for its user agent that impacted
metric providers’ ability to filter out duplicate downloads. The spike in downloads was
obvious to some of Tech Lab’s compliant companies and made known to IAB Tech Lab.
Once the source of the spike was identified as a change in metadata for Apple Watch
downloads, an addendum was issued to highlight the change so that metrics providers
could adjust their process.
The addendum required filtering out:
●
UA’s that begin with atc/ and include watchOS (for example atc/1.0 watchOS)
That label was changed again and the addendum was updated to include filtering out:
●
UA’s that contain (null)/(null) watchOS*
And yet again in recent years, Apple Watch became capable of downloading episodes
independent of its paired device. The result of these changes is that companies seeking
certification in Tech Lab’s compliance program are required to filter out UAs for Apple Watch
while today, some of those downloads may be a download that is unique and not duplicated on
a paired device.
However, detecting whether the download on a paired device is a duplicate or unique could be a
challenge, and as of the release of this document, Apple Watch downloads still represent a
significant amount of duplication. For now, Tech Lab’s guidance still requires filtering out Apple
Watch downloads. Should the counting methodology change, a new addendum will be issued.
8.2
Accounting for Changes in Technology
The above use case was specific to Apple Watch and likely caught because of the higher
market share for Apple devices. However, changes that impact podcast measurement happen
on more devices and with more frequency than our version update cycle for podcast
measurement guidelines.
Moving forward, compliant podcast measurement companies should have practices in place to
account for mass market technology changes in their measurement reports. Such practices
might include setting reasonable data thresholds to trigger warnings about anomalies in the
data, a course of action when anomalous data occurs, a subscription to common development
sites that report known issues or updates.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 28 of 29

Measurement practices for your company depend on your business model and strategy. When
seeking certification for compliance against these guidelines, be sure to share how your
company accounts for changes in technology and what you might be doing to address any
known issues or data spikes occurring in the market at the time of audit.
9. In Closing
Podcast syndication offers an enticing selection of inventory for audiences that are more
attentive and more loyal to their podcast shows. Measuring podcast advertising performance is
dependent on server-side counts and can offer sound data provided that podcast measurement
providers adhere to the recommendations outlined in this guidance document.
The recommendations we provide help to define a fair market for podcast inventory because it
reduces inflated counts that result from duplicate downloads, general invalid traffic (gIVT) such
as known bots, some of the more obvious sophisticated IVT, and temporary anomalies in the
data produced by changing technology or other significant events.
IAB Tech Lab’s Podcast Technical Measurement Working Group will continue to deliberate over
how to bring more clarity and fairness in measurement practices as well as ways to offer
support for this growing and lucrative market. Continue to check in on our site at
iabtechlab.com, or send your questions and suggestions to support@iabtechlab.com.
© 2024 IAB Tech Lab
Podcast Measurement Technical Guidelines v.2.2
Page 29 of 29
