Páginas institucionales usadas en el tema 6 del específico de Documentación.

========== Comité Ejecutivo del Banco Central Europeo
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/orga/decisions/eb/html/index.en.html
Leída el 3 de septiembre de 2026.

 YEAR
Suggestions
Search Results
-->
Home
Media
Explainers
Research & Publications
Statistics
Monetary Policy
The €uro
Payments & Markets
Careers
Suggestions
Sort by
Relevance
Date
Executive Board
The Executive Board consists of the President, the Vice-President and four other members.
All members are appointed by the European Council, acting by a qualified majority.
Members of the Executive Board
(as of June 2026)
Responsibilities
to prepare Governing Council meetings;
to implement monetary policy for the euro area in accordance with the guidelines specified and decisions taken by the Governing Council. In so doing, it gives the necessary instructions to the euro area NCBs;
to manage the day-to-day business of the ECB;
to exercise certain powers delegated to it by the Governing Council. These include some of a regulatory nature.
Christine Lagarde
President of the ECB
Boris Vujčić
Vice-President of the ECB
Piero Cipollone
Member of the Executive Board of the ECB
Frank Elderson
Member of the Executive Board of the ECB
Philip R. Lane
Member of the Executive Board of the ECB
Isabel Schnabel
Member of the Executive Board of the ECB
SEE ALSO
Find out more about related content
Guiding principles for speaking engagements
Executive Board responsibilities
Executive Board members’ terms of office
All pages in this section
Are you happy with this page?
Yes
No
What made you unhappy?
Page not working
Information not useful
Design not attractive
Something else
Thank you for letting us know!
Useful links
About us
Work with us
Explainers
Press photos
Contacts
Where to find us
Using our site
Disclaimer & Copyright
Privacy statement
Language policy
-->
Technical updates
Responsible disclosure
Corporate Policies
Data Protection
Privacy statement for the website
Cookies policy
Accessibility statement
Language policy
Contact
Contacts
Address
Public holidays
-->
Site directory
Copyright 2026,
European Central Bank
Follow us
-->
Back to top
-->
Our website uses cookies
We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:
Read our privacy statement
Learn more about how we use cookies
Learn more about how we use cookies
-->
I understand and I accept the use of
cookies
I do not accept the use of
cookies
Thank you!
Thank you!
We have updated our privacy policy
We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
by cookies.
See what has changed in our privacy policy
I understand and I accept the use of
cookies
I do not accept the use of
cookies
Your cookie preference has expired
We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
by cookies.
Learn more about how we use cookies
I understand and I accept the use of
cookies
I do not accept the use of
cookies
This feature requires cookies.
Modify

========== «Tasks & Mission», Agencia Europea de la Guardia de Fronteras y Costas
https://www.frontex.europa.eu/about-frontex/who-we-are/tasks-mission/
Leída el 3 de septiembre de 2026.

Frontex, the European Border and Coast Guard Agency, supports EU
Member States and Schengen-associated countries in the management 
of the EU’s external borders and the fight against cross-border crime.
Frontex is a centre of excellence for border control activities at the EU’s
external borders, sharing intelligence and expertise with all Member
States and with neighbouring non-EU countries affected by migratory
trends and cross-border crime.
With the Standing Corps, the European Union’s first uniformed law
enforcement service, Frontex has transformed into an operational 
arm of the EU.
Hundreds of officers take part in operations along the external borders of the European Union and beyond.
They perform a variety of tasks such as border surveillance, fighting
cross-border crime, and assisting in return operations.
The officers stand together with national authorities to safeguard the
Schengen Area, one of Europe’s greatest achievements.
Origin
The
ideas that led to the creation of Frontex have a deep history in the European
project. Fostering the free movement of people has been an important objective
of European integration. In 1957 the free movement of goods, persons, services, and
capital were identified as foundations of the Community in the Treaty of Rome.
Schengen
During
the 1980s, five Member States (Belgium, France, Germany, Luxembourg and the
Netherlands) decided to create a common area of free movement – a territory
without internal borders. In 1985, they signed the first agreement in a small
town in Luxembourg called Schengen – an agreement that was followed in 1990 by a
Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement.
When the
“Schengen Area,” a territory defined by the free movement of persons, entered
into force in 1995, checks at internal borders were abolished and a single
external border was created. Gradually, border control practices and the rules
governing visas and the right to asylum became common for all Schengen countries.
In order
to keep a balance between freedom and security, participating Member States
agreed to introduce additional measures focusing on the cooperation and
coordination of the work of police and judicial authorities. Because
organised crime networks do not respect borders, this cooperation became key to
safeguarding the internal security of the Schengen Area.
In 1999, with the signing of the Treaty of
Amsterdam, this intergovernmental cooperation was incorporated into the EU
framework.
Towards Frontex
Since
1999 the European Council on Justice and Home Affairs has taken several steps
towards further strengthening cooperation in the area of migration, asylum, and
security.
In the field of border management this led to the creation of the External Border
Practitioners Common Unit - a group composed of the members of the Strategic
Committee on Immigration, Frontiers, and Asylum (SCIFA) and heads of national
border control services.
The Common Unit coordinated the national projects of
Ad-Hoc Centres on Border Control. Their task was to oversee EU-wide pilot
projects and implement common operations related to border management.
Frontex is born
Two years
after the establishment of "ad-hoc" centres" the European Council
decided to go a step further. With the objective of improving the procedures and
working methods of the Common Unit,
Council Regulation (EC) 2007/2004
of 26
October 2004 led to the establishment of the European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the
European Union (Frontex).
This
Regulation was repealed by
Regulation (EU) 2016/1624
of 14 September 2016, establishing
Frontex, the European Border and Coast Guard Agency.
The latest amendment of the Frontex mandate occurred when
Regulation (EU) 2019/1896
of 13 November 2019 on the European Border and Coast Guard (OJ L 295, 14.11.2019, p. 1) came into force.
Our Mission
Together with EU Member States, we ensure safe and


========== «Who we are», Unión por el Mediterráneo
https://ufmsecretariat.org/who-we-are/
Leída el 3 de septiembre de 2026.

The Union for the Mediterranean is an intergovernmental institution bringing together the European Union Member States and 16 countries from the Southern and Eastern shores of the Mediterranean to promote dialogue and cooperation.
OVERVIEW
Who
we are
Member States
Meet the team
Partners
History
Transparency 
and accountability
Transparency and access to information
Investigating fraud, corruption and misconduct
Key
documents
More documents
What we do
The UfM seeks to enhance regional cooperation, dialogue and the implementation of concrete projects and initiatives with tangible impact on our citizens to address three strategic objectives: human development, stability and integration.
OVERVIEW
Inclusive
development
Economic Development and Employment
Higher Education & Research
Social & Civil Affairs
Sustainable
development
Water, Environment and Blue Economy
Transport & Urban Development
Energy & Climate Action
Initiatives that build 
bridges
Day of the Mediterranean
Mediterranean Capitals of Culture and Dialogue
How
we work
Policy Frameworks
Regional Platforms
Projects and Initiatives
Work with us
The UfM Secretariat is the operational platform of the Union for the Mediterranean. The staff of the UfM is made of more than 17 nationalities working in a multicultural environment that fosters cooperation and intercultural communication and exchange.
Work
with us
Vacancies
Secondments
Internships
Procurement
Info centre
Find our latest press releases, press invitations, visual identity, key institutional documents, photos and other relevant information 
DOWNLOAD THE UfM VISUAL IDENTITY GUIDELINES AND LOGOS (ZIP FILE)
Info
centre
Media corner
News
Agenda
Publications and key documents
Stories of Euro-Mediterranean Cooperation
UfM
in the Media
[wpv-post-title]
-->
9 May 2026 – Agence Europe (EN) – The fire season that never ends – by Joan Borrell Mayeur
View article
[wpv-post-title]
-->
9 May 2026 – Agence Europe (FR) – Une saison des feux qui n’en finit pas – par Joan Borrell Mayeur
View article
[wpv-post-title]
-->
7 May 2026 – Al-Dustour – حرائق غابات المتوسط على وشك أن تبدأ مجدداً… بلا حدود
View article
Contact
The UfM: an action-driven organisation with a common ambition
The
UfM’s
missi
on is to enhance regional cooperation, dialogue and projects and initiatives that have a tangible impact on our citizens, with an emphasis on young people and women, 
in order to
address the region’s three strategic
objectives
: 
stability
,
inclusive
development
 and 
integration
.
The Union for the Mediterranean (UfM) is an intergovernmental organisation that
brings together 43 countries
to strengthen regional cooperation and dialogue through specific
projects and initiatives
that address inclusive and sustainable development, stability and integration in the Euro-Mediterranean area. As a direct continuation of the Barcelona Process, the launch of the UfM in 2008 was the reflection of its member states’ shared political commitment to enhance the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership.
Since its inception, the UfM has undertaken a diverse range of projects and initiatives to promote
inclusive regional sustainable development and integration
. The organisation champions
women’s rights, job creation
, fosters cross-country
connectivity efforts
and addresses
environmental and climate emergencies
.
The UfM also prioritises grant schemes and programmes to encourage entrepreneurship and
job opportunities for young people
, recognising their crucial role in shaping the region’s future. The organisation is working on a unique instrument to accelerate investment in the
blue economy
and the creation of a regional
civil protection
instrument.
Embracing the cultural richness of the Euro-Mediterranean region, the UfM has launched initiatives, such as the
Day of the Mediterranean
and the
Mediterranean Capitals of Culture & Dialogue
, to celebrate diversity, promote dialogue, and cultivate mutual understanding.
Learn more about the history of the UfM
The Me


========== «About the Fed», Junta de Gobernadores de la Reserva Federal
https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed.htm
Leída el 3 de septiembre de 2026.

The Federal Reserve, the central bank of the United States, provides
the nation with a safe, flexible, and stable monetary and financial
system.
Main Menu Toggle Button
Sections
Search Toggle Button
Search
Search Submit Button
Submit
About
the Fed
Structure of the Federal Reserve System
The Fed Explained
Board Members
Advisory Councils
Federal Reserve Banks
Federal Reserve Bank and Branch Directors
Federal Reserve Act
Currency
Board Meetings
Board Votes
Careers
Do Business with the Board
Holidays Observed - K.8
Ethics & Values
Contact
Requesting Information (FOIA)
FAQs
Economic Education
Fed Financial Statements
Financial Innovation
News
& Events
Press Releases
Speeches & Testimony
Calendar
Videos
Photo Gallery
Conferences
Monetary
Policy
Federal Open Market Committee
About the FOMC
Meeting calendars and information
Transcripts and other historical materials
FAQs
Monetary Policy Principles and Practice
Notes
Policy Implementation
Policy Normalization
Policy Tools
Reports
Monetary Policy Report
Beige Book
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet Developments
Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications
Overview
Supervision
& Regulation
Supervision
Community Banks
Regional Banks and Foreign Banks with U.S. Assets
Large Banks and Large Foreign Banks
Global Systemically Important Banks
Financial Market
Utilities
Consumer
Compliance
Resources for Supervised Institutions
Reports
Federal Reserve
Supervision and Regulation Report
Reporting Forms
Recent Reporting Form Updates
Information Collections
Under Review
Financial
Statements
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Applications/Structure Change
FFIEC
Municipal and
Government Securities
Activities Monitoring
Micro Data Reference Manual
Legal Developments
Enforcement Actions and
Legal Developments
Mergers, Acquisitions, and Other Applications
Process
Filing
Information
Board and Reserve
Bank Actions
Supervision and Regulation Letters
By Year
By Topic
Regulatory and Policy Resources
Federal Reserve Act
Bank Holding Company Act
Regulations
Supervision Manuals
Federal Reserve Regulatory Service
Disaster Preparedness and Recovery Resources
Banking and Data Structure
Beneficial Ownership
Reports
U.S. Domestically Chartered Commercial Banks
Minority Depository
Institutions
U.S. Offices of Foreign Entities
Financial Holding
Companies
Interstate
Branching
Securities
Underwriting and Dealing Subsidiaries
State Member Banks Supervised by the Federal Reserve
Financial
Stability
Financial Stability Assessments
About Financial Stability
Types of Financial System Vulnerabilities & Risks
Monitoring Risk Across the Financial System
Proactive Monitoring of Markets & Institutions
Financial Stability & Stress Testing
Financial Stability Coordination & Actions
Responding to Financial System Emergencies
Cooperation on Financial Stability
Reports
Financial Stability Report
Payment
Systems
Regulations & Statutes
Regulation CC (Availability of Funds and Collection of Checks)
Regulation II (Debit Card Interchange Fees and Routing)
Regulation HH (Financial Market Utilities)
Other Regulations and Statutes
Payment Policies
Federal Reserve's Key Policies for the Provision of Financial Services
Guidelines for Evaluating Joint Account Requests
Overnight Overdrafts
Payment System Risk
Sponsorship for Priority Telecommunication Services
Reserve Bank Payment Services & Data
Automated Clearinghouse Services
Check Services
Currency and Coin Services
Daylight Overdrafts and Fees
FedNow
®
Service
Fedwire Funds Services
Fedwire Securities Services
Fiscal Agency Services
Master Account and Services Database
National Settlement Service
Financial Market Utilities & Infrastructures
Supervision & Oversight of Financial Market Infrastructures
Designated Financial Market Utilities
International Standards for Financial Market Infrastructures
Research, Reports, & Committees
Federal Reserve Payments Study (FRPS)
Payments Research
Reports
Payments System Policy Advisory Committee
Economic
Research
Meet the Research


========== «Chromosome», glosario del Instituto Nacional de Investigación del Genoma Humano
https://www.genome.gov/genetics-glossary/Chromosome
Leída el 3 de septiembre de 2026.

Chromosomes are threadlike structures made of protein and a single molecule of DNA that serve to carry the genomic information from cell to cell. In plants and animals (including humans), chromosomes reside in the nucleus of cells. Humans have 22 pairs of numbered chromosomes (autosomes) and one pair of sex chromosomes (XX or XY), for a total of 46. Each pair contains two chromosomes, one coming from each parent, which means that children inherit half of their chromosomes from their mother and half from their father. Chromosomes can be seen through a microscope when the nucleus dissolves during cell division. 
Narration
Chromosomes vary in number and shape among living organisms. Most bacteria have one or two circular chromosomes. Humans, along with other animals and plants, have linear chromosomes
.
In fact, each species of plants and animals has a set number of chromosomes. A fruit fly, for example, has four pairs of chromosomes, while a rice plant has 12 and a dog, 39.
In humans, the twenty-third pair is the sex chromosomes, while the first 22 pairs are called autosomes.
Typically, biologically female individuals have two X chromosomes (XX) while those who are biologically male have one X and one Y chromosome (XY). However, there are exceptions to these rules.
Chromosomes are also different sizes. The human X chromosome is about three times larger than the human Y chromosome, containing about 900 genes, while the Y chromosome has about 55 genes.
The unique structure of chromosomes keeps DNA tightly wound around spool-like proteins, called histones. Without such packaging, DNA molecules would be too long to fit inside cells!
For example, if all of the DNA molecules in a single human cell were unwound from their histones and placed end-to-end, they would stretch 6 feet.
Sarah A. Bates, M.S., M.A.
Communications Director
Office of Communications
Search
Back to Glossary
Related
Double Helix
Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA)
Nucleosome
Histone
Get Updates
Enter your email address to receive updates about the latest advances in genomics research.
Subscribe!
Social Media Stream
Footer Links
Contact
Accessibility
Site Map
Staff Search
Plug-Ins Used by HHS
FOIA
Privacy
Copyright
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure


========== «CRISPR», glosario del Instituto Nacional de Investigación del Genoma Humano
https://www.genome.gov/genetics-glossary/CRISPR
Leída el 3 de septiembre de 2026.

CRISPR (short for “clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats”) is a technology that research scientists use to selectively modify the DNA of living organisms. CRISPR was adapted for use in the laboratory from naturally occurring genome editing systems found in bacteria.
Narration
CRISPR. When I first learned about CRISPR about a decade ago, the technology and the future possibilities were just amazing. A few years after that, I had the joy of meeting Dr. Jennifer Doudna at a small meeting at NHGRI, and we knew at that time that we were talking to a future Nobel Prize winner and, indeed, she got that very recently. This class of enzymes from bacteria has many, many uses, and I thought I'd pick one just for its timeliness. It provided the simple method for detection of COVID ribonucleic acid -- or RNA -- without making copies up front or performing gene amplification, or sometimes called PCR. And that's just a nice impactful example of so many places that this discovery has been important.
Mike Smith, Ph.D.
Former Program Director, Genome Technology Program
Division of Genome Sciences
Search
Back to Glossary
Related
Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA)
Gene Therapy
Messenger RNA (mRNA)
Ribonucleic Acid (RNA)
Get Updates
Enter your email address to receive updates about the latest advances in genomics research.
Subscribe!
Social Media Stream
Footer Links
Contact
Accessibility
Site Map
Staff Search
Plug-Ins Used by HHS
FOIA
Privacy
Copyright
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure


========== Contactos del Banco Europeo de Inversiones
https://www.eib.org/en/about/contact/index.htm
Leída el 3 de septiembre de 2026.

EIB Switchboard:
Contact a member of staff in a specific service
98-100, boulevard Konrad Adenauer
L-2950 Luxembourg
+352 43 79 1
+352 43 77 04
Our offices around the world
Print
Share
General information:
Enquiries regarding the financing facilities, activity, organisation and objectives of the EIB
Infodesk@eib.org
Contact form
Frequently asked questions
Disclosure of documents:
Enquiries regarding the EIB Group Transparency Policy, and requests for access to project related information
Contact form
Infodesk@eib.org
+352 4379-62000
Press Office:
Press Office Division
Communication Department
Contact press office
+352 43791
+352 4379-61000
Anti corruption Hotline:
Inspectorate General
Fraud Investigations
investigations@eib.org
+352 4379-64000
How to report fraud or corruption?
Complaints:
Inspectorate General
Complaints Mechanism
complaints@eib.org
+352 4379-14005
How to lodge a complaint?
Project procurement complaints:
Inspectorate General
procurementcomplaints@eib.org
How to lodge a project procurement complaint?
Capital Markets:
Enquiries related to EIB's activities on the capital markets
Investor Relations
investor.relations@eib.org
+352 4379-53000
Legal notice
Recording of telephone calls
EIB Group Client Portal:
https://groupclientportal.eib.org
Watch how the portal works
Webmaster
Report a technical problem or comment on the quality of this website
webmaster@eib.org
EIB Group Jobs portal
Report technical problems you encounter while applying in our Jobs portal.
Jobs@


========== Portada del festival Sónar
https://sonar.es/es
Leída el 3 de septiembre de 2026.

Sónar - 18.19.20 Junio 2026
Sónar en el mundo
Sónar Week
Info práctica 2026
Noticias
About
ES
Music
Innovation
& Creativity
17.18.19
Junio 2027
Barcelona
Sónar 2026
Galerias
SonarMix
Sónar+D 2026
Partners
1
/
3
Revive Sónar 2026
Vuelve a ver al completo algunas de las mejores actuaciones
Ver más
Sónar+D
Descubre los espacios compartidos entre la creatividad, la innovación y la tecnología en Sónar+D, un evento sin igual.
Aquí convergen charlas, mesas de debate, exposiciones, performances e ideas, haciendo de Barcelona un punto de encuentro anual para las mentes más curiosas y creativas del mundo.
Ver más
Entérate de todo antes que nadie
Suscríbete a nuestra newsletter para conocer al minuto todas las novedades sobre Sónar 2027.
Suscríbete
SonarApp
Política de privacidad
Condiciones de uso web
Política de cookies
Condiciones generales
Copyright © Advanced Music SL 2026


========== Museo Egipcio y Colección de Papiros, Museos Estatales de Berlín
https://www.smb.museum/en/museums-institutions/aegyptisches-museum-und-papyrussammlung/home/
Leída el 3 de septiembre de 2026.

Bust of Nefertiti
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin, Ägyptisches Museum und Papyrussammlung / Sandra Steiß
The bust of Nefertiti
Collections Online
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin
Explore the collection of the Ägyptisches Museum und Papyrussammlung online
Berlin Papyrus Database
List of Residents (P 1537)
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin, Ägyptisches Museum und Papyrussammlung / Berliner Papyrusdatenbank
BerlPap: Online inventory of the Berliner Papyrussammlung
ERC Project ELEPHANTINE
Papyrus fragment originating from the Nile island of Elephantine, held between sheets of glass in the storerooms of the Archäologisches Zentrum
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin / Juliane Eirich
Texts and Scripts from Elephantine Island in Egypt
Facebook
Join the Neues Museum on Facebook!
Join the Neues Museum on Facebook!
Instagram
Follow the Staatliche Museen zu Berlin on Instagram!
Follow the Staatliche Museen zu Berlin on Instagram!
Online Offers
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin, Ägyptisches Museum und Papyrussammlung / Sandra Steiß
Films, podcasts, virtual tours and more from the Ägyptisches Museum und Papyrussammlung
About the Collection
Bust of Nefertiti, Egypt, Tell el-Amarna, New Kingdom, 18th Dynasty, around 1351–1334 BC, gifted by James Simon
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin, Ägyptisches Museum und Papyrussammlung / Margarete Büsing
About the collection of the Ägyptisches Museum und Papyrussammlung in the Neues Museum
Staff
Staff of the Staatliche Museen zu Berlin
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin
Who works at the Ägyptisches Museum und Papyrussammlung?
Webshop
Bookstore in the Neue Nationalgalerie
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin / Roman März
Explore our wide selection of books and products!
Staatliche Museen zu Berlin
Museums & Institutions
Research
Staff
Career
FAQ – Frequently Asked Questions
Plan Your Visit
Tickets Online
Prices & Admission
Opening Hours
Special Opening Hours
Floor Plans
What’s On?
Exhibitions
Events
Bookable Events
News
Discover Online
Collections Online
Online Offers
Webshop
Follow & Subscribe
Press
Press Material
Press Dates
Applications for Permissions
Service
Simple Language
Sign Language
Venue Hire
Contact
Legal Notice
Privacy
Cookie Settings
Accessibility
Report Access Barrier
Terms and Conditions
Museum Regulations
About Cookies
This website uses cookies. Those have two functions: On the one hand they are providing basic functionality for this website. On the other hand they allow us to improve our content for you by saving and analyzing anonymized user data. 


========== Portada del Neues Museum, Museos Estatales de Berlín
https://www.smb.museum/en/museums-institutions/neues-museum/home/
Leída el 3 de septiembre de 2026.

u Berlin, Museum für Vor- und Frühgeschichte / Claudia Plamp
Prehistory and early history
Neues Museum
Permanent exhibition
Swords and lance, Bronze. 9.-8. Century BC, Stölln
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin, Museum für Vor- und Frühgeschichte / Klaus Göken
Stone Age, Bronze Age, Iron Age
Neues Museum
Permanent exhibition
A cross-section sample of the finds from the Treasure of Neupotz, 2nd half of the 3rd century AD
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin, Museum für Vor- und Frühgeschichte / Claudia Klein
Treasures from the Rhine: The Barbarian Treasure of Neupotz
Neues Museum
Permanent exhibition
Previous
Next
Next Event
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin / David von Becker
UNESCO Welterbe Museumsinsel
For Children and Families
Event at the Neues Museum
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin / Marcus Glahn, 2019
Golden Hat, Nefertiti and Co.
For Adults
Event at Neues Museum
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin / Anika Büssemeier
From prehistory and early history to ancient Egypt
News
Foto: Staatliche Museen zu Berlin / Enikö Gömöri
Our Museumsinsel – New Booklet for Children and Families
Blog
Museum and the City - Blog of the Staatliche Museen zu Berlin
Stories from the Neues Museum (German only)
Online Offers
Neues Museum
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin / Sandra Steiß
Films, podcasts, virtual tours and more from the Neues Museum
Facebook
Join the Neues Museum on Facebook!
Join the Neues Museum on Facebook!
Annual Tickets
Jan Brueghel d. J.: Das Paradies, detail, um 1650
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin, Gemäldegalerie / Jörg P. Anders
Enjoy art and culture as often as you like!
Collections Online
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin
Online portal for the Staatliche Museen zu Berlin collections
Films
Neues Museum
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin / Sandra Steiß
Video series, exhibition trailers and more films of the Neues Museum
About the Collections
The “Rome’s Provinces” room
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin / Achim Kleuker
Ägyptisches Museum und Papyrussammlung and Museum für Vor- und Frühgeschichte in the Neues Museum
Webshop
Webshop of the Staatliche Museen zu Berlin
© Staatliche Museen zu Berlin / Roman März
Explore our wide selection of books and products!
Staatliche Museen zu Berlin
Museums & Institutions
Research
Staff
Career
FAQ – Frequently Asked Questions
Plan Your Visit
Tickets Online
Prices & Admission
Opening Hours
Special Opening Hours
Floor Plans
What’s On?
Exhibitions
Events
Bookable Events
News
Discover Online
Collections Online
Online Offers
Webshop
Follow & Subscribe
Press
Press Material
Press Dates
Applications for Permissions
Service
Simple Language
Sign Language
Venue Hire
Contact
Legal Notice
Privacy
Cookie Settings
Accessibility
Report Access Barrier
Terms and Conditions
Museum Regulations
About Cookies
This website uses cookies. Those have two functions: On the one hand th
