 
Copyright © 2019  by THE SOCIETY OF 
MOTION PICTURE AND TELEVISION ENGINEERS 
445 Hamitlon Ave, White Plains, NY 10601 
(914) 761-1100 
Approved December 26, 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                Page 
1 
Scope............................................................................................................................................. 3 
2 
Conformance Notation ................................................................................................................ 3 
3 
Normative References ................................................................................................................. 3 
4 
Terms and Definitions ................................................................................................................. 4 
5 
Symbols and Abbreviated Terms ............................................................................................... 5 
6 
Creation of Streams for Seamless Reconstruction .................................................................. 5 
7 
Reception of Streams for Seamless Reconstruction ............................................................... 6 
Annex A   Stream Synchronization  (Informative) ................................................................................... 8 
 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 11 
SMPTE ST 2022-7:2019 
Revision of ST 2022-7:2013 
 
SMPTE STANDARD 
Seamless Protection Switching of 
RTP Datagrams 

SMPTE ST 2022-7:2019 
Page 2 of 11 pages 
Foreword 
SMPTE (the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers) is an internationally-recognized standards 
developing organization. Headquartered and incorporated in the United States of America, SMPTE has 
members in over 80 countries on six continents. SMPTE’s Engineering Documents, including Standards, 
Recommended Practices, and Engineering Guidelines, are prepared by SMPTE’s Technology Committees.  
Participation in these Committees is open to all with a bona fide interest in their work. SMPTE cooperates 
closely with other standards-developing organizations, including ISO, IEC and ITU. 
SMPTE Engineering Documents are drafted in accordance with the rules given in its Standards Operations 
Manual. 
SMPTE ST 2022-7 was prepared by Technology Committee 32NF on Network/Facilities Architecture.  
Intellectual Property 
 
At the time of publication no notice had been received by SMPTE claiming patent rights essential to the 
implementation of this Engineering Document.  However, attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the 
elements of this document may be the subject of patent rights. SMPTE shall not be held responsible for 
identifying any or all such patent rights. 
 
Introduction 
This section is entirely informative and does not form an integral part of this Engineering Document. 
This document is a standard for seamless reconstruction of a stream of RTP datagrams based on the 
transmission of multiple streams of identical content over potentially diverse paths (see Figure 1). The primary 
reason for this standard is to facilitate interoperability between equipment used to transport media signals 
composed of RTP datagrams intended for such reconstruction.   
Cost effective error free transport of media essence is a constant goal.  As costs of redundant network paths 
decrease, sending redundant streams becomes a more viable option.  This standard defines requirements on 
redundant streams such that a receiver could switch between them on a datagram by datagram basis without 
impact to the content or the stream.  
 
Figure 1 – Conceptual Diagram of Multiple Paths 
 
 

SMPTE ST 2022-7:2019 
Page 3 of 11 pages 
1 
Scope 
This standard defines requirements for multiple redundant streams of RTP packets to allow for the creation of 
a single reconstructed output stream through seamless protection switching at the RTP datagram level. 
2 
Conformance Notation 
Normative text is text that describes elements of the design that are indispensable or contains the conformance 
language keywords: "shall", "should", or "may". Informative text is text that is potentially helpful to the user, but 
not indispensable, and can be removed, changed, or added editorially without affecting interoperability. 
Informative text does not contain any conformance keywords.  
All text in this document is, by default, normative, except: the Introduction, any section explicitly labeled as 
"Informative" or individual paragraphs that start with "Note:”  
The keywords "shall" and "shall not" indicate requirements strictly to be followed in order to conform to the 
document and from which no deviation is permitted. 
The keywords, "should" and "should not" indicate that, among several possibilities, one is recommended as 
particularly suitable, without mentioning or excluding others; or that a certain course of action is preferred but 
not necessarily required; or that (in the negative form) a certain possibility or course of action is deprecated but 
not prohibited.  
The keywords "may" and "need not" indicate courses of action permissible within the limits of the document.  
The keyword “reserved” indicates a provision that is not defined at this time, shall not be used, and may be 
defined in the future. The keyword “forbidden” indicates “reserved” and in addition indicates that the provision 
will never be defined in the future. 
A conformant implementation according to this document is one that includes all mandatory provisions 
("shall") and, if implemented, all recommended provisions ("should") as described. A conformant 
implementation need not implement optional provisions ("may") and need not implement them as described. 
Unless otherwise specified, the order of precedence of the types of normative information in this document 
shall be as follows:  Normative prose shall be the authoritative definition; Tables shall be next;  followed by 
formal languages;  then figures;  and then any other language forms. 
3 
Normative References  
The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this 
standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and 
parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of the standards indicated below. 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) RFC 3550 RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications 
[online, viewed 2017-08-10] Available at https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3550.txt 
 

SMPTE ST 2022-7:2019 
Page 4 of 11 pages 
4 
Terms and Definitions 
4.1 
class HBR stream  
a flow of datagrams with a payload bit rate greater than or equal to 270 Mbit/s 
 
4.2 
class SBR stream 
a flow of RTP datagrams with a payload bit rate of less than 270 Mbit/s 
4.3 
datagram copies 
set of redundant RTP datagrams, perhaps transmitted to a different IP destination or port, but having identical 
contents in the RTP header and RTP payload 
4.4 
high-skew 
potentially large jitter and very large network transit delay variation due to alternative routes, as might be found 
on a link between two facilities (an inter-facility link) 
Note: The combination of switching-induced jitter and differential path delay in a high-skew link can be greater 
than 50ms. 
4.5 
input stream 
stream of RTP datagrams in accordance with RFC 3550, which might represent essence or FEC 
Note:  Some examples of RTP stream specifications are: SMPTE ST 2022-1, SMPTE ST 2022-2, SMPTE ST 
2022-3, SMPTE ST 2022-4, SMPTE ST 2022-5, SMPTE ST 2022-6, SMPTE ST 2110-20, SMPTE ST 2110-
30, SMPTE ST 2110-40 and AES67.   
4.6 
low-skew 
Jitter and delay due to a modest number of router/switch hops and and a reasonably short distance traveled, 
where the combination of switching-induced jitter and differential path delay is by design less than 10 ms, as 
might be found on a link within a facility (an intra-facility link) 
4.7 
moderate-skew 
Jitter and delay due to a moderate number of router/switch hops regardless of path length, where the 
combination of switching-induced jitter and differential path delay in such a link is by design less than 50 ms, 
as might be found on a short-haul link between two facilities within a region or a small country 
4.8 
output stream 
reconstructed datagram stream that results from processing the multiple copies of the input stream 
Note: This output stream might occur at an intermediate stage within a device or system. 
4.9 
RTP datagram  
RTP packet as defined in RFC 3550 

SMPTE ST 2022-7:2019 
Page 5 of 11 pages 
4.10 
seamless reconstruction   
successful creation of a “reconstructed” output stream based on receipt of two or more (potentially network 
impaired) input streams meeting the requirements specified in this standard such that the RTP header and 
payload of the reconstructed stream are identical to the input stream(s) 
4.11 
ultra low-skew 
a small amount of jitter and delay, as might be found on a link over a small number of LAN switch hops within 
a facility, where the combination of switching-induced jitter and differential path delay in such a link is by 
design less than 150 µs 
5 
Symbols and Abbreviated Terms  
ASI – Asynchronous Serial Interface 
DWDM – Dense Wave Division Multiplexing 
FEC – Forward Error Correction 
HBR – High Bit Rate 
MPLS – Multiprotocol Label Switching 
RTP – Real Time Protocol (see IETF RFC 3550) 
SBR – Slow Bit Rate 
VSID – Video Source ID 
VPN – Virtual Private Network 
6 
Creation of Streams for Seamless Reconstruction 
The transmitter shall transmit at least two streams, each containing copies of each RTP datagram.  The RTP 
header and the RTP payload shall be identical for each datagram copy.  The seamless reconstruction method 
described herein makes no assumptions about the Ethernet or IP headers of the source streams.   
Note:  In copies of a SMPTE ST 2022-6 RTP datagram, the VSID field, as part of the RTP payload, will be 
identical across the datagram copies. 

SMPTE ST 2022-7:2019 
Page 6 of 11 pages 
7 
Reception of Streams for Seamless Reconstruction 
 
Figure 2 – Key Timing Points for Seamless Reconstruction 
The key timing points for seamless reconstruction of RTP streams are illustrated in Figure 2. 
Pn (where n ∈ 1…N) is the instantaneous latency from transmission to reception of datagrams on path number 
n of N paths, inclusive of any network jitter. 
PT is the latency from transmission to the final reconstructed output.  It is also the latest time that a packet 
could arrive at the receiver to be part of the reconstructed output. 
EA is the earliest time that a packet could arrive at the receiver to ensure seamless reconstruction. 
MD is the maximum differential and is the difference of PT and EA. 
MD = (PT-EA) 
PD is the instantaneous path differential, and is equal to the maximum of the absolute value of the differences 
between instantaneous latencies.  
PD = max
𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗∈1…𝑁𝑁หPi −Pjห   
The latency PT is established by the receiver at startup.  After startup, Pn might change due to changes in 
network routing and latency, but only to the extent that PD remains within the bounds specified below.     
A compliant receiver for Classes A, B, C or D shall support Seamless Reconstruction from streams that maintain 
a PD value of less than or equal to those specified in the Table 1 for its classification. 
 
 

SMPTE ST 2022-7:2019 
Page 7 of 11 pages 
 
Receiver Classification 
Use Case (example) 
Class SBR Streams 
Class HBR Streams 
Class A: Low-Skew 
Intra-Facility Links 
PD <= 10ms 
PD <= 10ms 
Class B: Moderate-Skew 
Short-Haul Links 
PD <= 50ms 
PD <= 50ms 
Class C: High-Skew 
Long-Haul or special 
circumstance Links 
PD <= 450ms 
PD <= 150ms 
Class D: Ultra Low-Skew 
Physical Layer LAN 
Redundancy 
PD <= 150µsec 
PD <= 150µsec 
 
Table 1 – Receiver Classifications 
Note:  The Class SBR and Class HBR defined in this document were loosely modeled on class 6 and class 7 
as described in Recommendation ITU-T Y.1541. However, Y.1541 describes their use for Access Distribution 
infrastructure, whereas the application of this standard is for contribution links. 
Only paths with a latency Pi that is greater than EA and less than PT can be used to source packets to potentially 
be used in the output streams. 
As long as there are at least two paths with latencies Pi and Pj that are greater than EA and less than PT then 
seamless reconstruction is able to recover from a packet loss in one of those two paths and create a 
successful output stream. 
A path may include a mechanism of temporal offset redundancy. 
Note:  The exact the method of reconstruction is left to the implementer. 
Annex A describes a mechanism to correlate stream times.  Annex B provides suggestions on management 
and monitoring.  Annex C describes use cases for seamless protection switching.  
 

SMPTE ST 2022-7:2019 
Page 8 of 11 pages 
Annex A   Stream Synchronization  (Informative) 
By the method envisioned herein, the RTP sequence numbers can be used to correlate multiple packet streams.  
Since the sequence numbers roll over relatively frequently in Class HBR streams, in high bandwidth applications 
the RTP timestamps can be used in addition to the sequence numbers to ensure proper matching of the 
incoming streams, when they are present.  
In the case of a 1080p/60Hz video stream, the HD-SDI bit-rate is 2.970 Gbits/sec.  Each packet of ST 2022-6 
carrying this video stream conveys 1376 octets (or 11008 bits) of the signal, generating 270 packets 
(approximately) each millisecond. 
In the case of a class C receiver and an HBR stream, when the PD value is zero at startup, the receiver must 
plan to accommodate future path delay excursions of up to 150ms in either direction on either stream; 
establishment of a 300ms window (PT = P1 + 150ms, EA = PT − 300ms) fulfills this requirement.  During this 
300ms window for class HBR streams, there would be approximately 81,000 packets in the window in the case 
of 1080p60Hz HD-SDI.  There are only 16 bits used to convey the RTP sequence number in ST 2022-6, rolling 
over every 65,536 packets.  Therefore it is impossible to tell by sequence number alone the relative values of 
Pn while maintaining the buffers implied for a class C receiver. 
The RTP header timestamp values in ST 2022-6 are a required field.  They are specified in terms of a 27MHz 
free-running clock, and 32 bits are used, leading to an RTP timestamp roll-over period of approximately 159.07 
seconds (2^32/27,000,000).  In the perfectly smooth case, there are about 100 ticks of the 27MHz RTP 
timestamp clock for every 1080p60Hz ST 2022-6 datagram. 
The multiple redundant streams, by normative provision of this document, have identical RTP timestamps. 
These timestamps by themselves can indicate the relative skew (time) between Pn’s quite accurately, and the 
timestamp values themselves could be used to match up the packets between the two streams.  Alternatively, 
the monotonically increasing sequence numbers can be augmented with a function of the difference between 
the timestamps to correctly correlate the arriving packets. 
In the general case, the receiver does not know the absolute values of Pn’s. It only knows the difference between 
them.  Individual implementations can take different approaches to establishing a startup delay PT, however, 
barring any a-priori knowledge of the network, a class C receiver, to account for worse case, could start up as 
follows: 
For Class C receivers (high skew) processing SBR streams — Set PT (the latency from transmission to 
the final reconstructed output) to 450 ms after the earlier of the two streams, and set EA to 900 ms less 
than PT. 
For Class C receivers (high skew) processing HBR streams — Set the PT to 150 ms after the earlier of 
the two streams, and set EA to 300 ms less than PT. 
 
 
 
 
 

SMPTE ST 2022-7:2019 
Page 9 of 11 pages 
Annex B   Management and Monitoring  (Informative) 
Management and monitoring are important capabilities of any video network. A receiver could allow the tracking 
of received and lost datagrams per stream.    
A receiver could expose the matching buffer setting to the users and/or provisioning/monitoring software so that 
it can be observed and adjusted to compensate for potential delay problems between the streams, or to allow 
configuring the receiver for specific path delay situations about which the operator might have a-priori 
information. 
A receiver might expose indicators and publish notifications to provisioning/monitoring software as the receiver 
transitions between a protected and non-protected state so that users are made aware of the protection state 
at all times. 
 
 

SMPTE ST 2022-7:2019 
Page 10 of 11 pages 
Annex C   Use Cases  (Informative) 
Potential network points to implement seamless protection switching 
 
• 
Video encoder/decoder with network port 
• 
ASI network receiver/transmitter 
• 
SMPTE ST 2022 network receiver/transmitter 
• 
AES67 network receiver/transmitter 
• 
SMPTE ST 2110 network receiver/transmitter 
• 
Network router or switch 
• 
Network interface card 
• 
Dedicated network attached seamless processor 
 
Network Use Cases 
There are many types of network situations that can be augmented with seamless protection switching.  The 
following cases define some common network types. These network types could be used for one or both of the 
streams.   
Satellite transmission can add substantial latency to the stream transmission. The minimum requirements of 
this standard might not support combinations of satellite and fiber links with instantaneous path differentials 
higher than that of Class C receivers in this document. A device with capabilities to support instantaneous path 
differentials higher than that of Class C could support this use case. 
When using MPLS or Internet connectivity with or without a VPN, network latency can change over time as 
paths reroute due to failures and traffic grooming (the latter being the process of grouping many small 
telecommunications flows into larger units, which can be processed as single entities, such as in a single 
wavelength).  The required class of seamless protection switching can be chosen to accommodate this. 
The main variants of protected private line are protected SONET and protected DWDM wavelengths. Protected 
networks can offer a higher level of reliability, but also can complicate a seamless network. If the two protected 
circuits share a segment of the same physical path there can be a situation where the stream is not actually 
protected from failures along that segment.   
Unprotected SONET and unprotected DWDM wavelengths are also available. Unprotected circuits are 
generally much less expensive than a protected circuit.  They offer complete visibility to both paths allowing the 
user to know the status of both paths of the network at all times. 
Another potential use case differs in that it is not a diverse path network type, but is instead formed by offsetting 
in time the primary stream from the secondary stream; this arrangement offers protection from network errors 
smaller than the offset. This method allows some form of protection while not requiring two network paths. 
 
 

SMPTE ST 2022-7:2019 
Page 11 of 11 pages 
Bibliography  (Informative) 
AES67-2015 AES standard for audio applications of networks - High-performance streaming audio-over-IP 
interoperability 
Recommendation ITU-T Y.1541, Network Performance Objectives for IP-Based Services 
SMPTE ST 2022-1:2007, Forward Error Correction for Real-Time Video/Audio Transport Over IP Networks 
SMPTE ST 2022-2:2007, Unidirectional Transport of Constant Bit Rate MPEG-2 Transport Streams on IP 
Networks 
SMPTE ST 2022-3:2010, Unidirectional Transport of Variable Bit Rate MPEG-2 Transport Streams on IP 
Networks 
SMPTE ST 2022-4:2011, Unidirectional Transport of Non-Piecewise Constant Variable Bit Rate MPEG-2 
Streams on IP Networks 
SMPTE ST 2022-5:2013, Forward Error Correction for High Bit Rate Media Transport over IP Networks 
(HBRMT) 
SMPTE ST 2022-6:2012, Transport of High Bit Rate Media Signals over IP Networks (HBRMT) 
SMPTE ST 2110-10:2017, Professional Media Over Managed IP Networks, System Timing and Definitions 
SMPTE ST 2110-20:2017, Professional Media Over Managed IP Networks, Uncompressed Active Video 
SMPTE ST 2110-30:2017, Professional Media Over Managed IP Networks, PCM Digital Audio 
SMPTE ST 2110-40:2018, Professional Media Over Managed IP Networks, SMPTE ST 291-1 Ancillary Data 
 
 
 
 
 
