«About us», portal audiovisual de la Comisión Europea
https://audiovisual.ec.europa.eu/en/about
Leída el 3 de septiembre de 2026.

Audiovisual Service - About us
EN
Search
Search
Audiovisual portal
Menu
Back
Home
EBS channels
About EBS channels
The European Broadcasting Service (EBS), the European Union's TV information service, together with the AV Portal, provides EU-related audiovisual material free of charge to media professionals to support reporting on European issues, as well as for educational purposes.
EBS schedule
Technical information
Top stories
Audiovisual content
About audiovisual content
Explore a comprehensive collection of EU audiovisual Content — videos, photos, and podcasts covering press events, institutional activities, and European stories.
Discover more
Videos
Photos
Podcasts
EU history
About EU history
Discover the people behind the stories — browse visual archives of former Presidents and EU Summits, with context on their role in shaping EU policies and identity.
Discover more
Milestones
Former commissions
Honorary citizens of Europe
Former presidents
Diplomatic relations
European councils and summits
Anniversaries
Pioneers of the European Union
EU treaties
EBS history
Conditions of use
About us
Page contents
Mission
Show full page table of contents
Mission
Activities
Authorisation
Welcome to the European Commission's Audiovisual Service! We are the EU related news and archive service providing indispensable information tailored for professionals in the media. We supply up to the minute audiovisual news coverage to the media around the world and deliver unique archive on the history of the EU.
Mission
We offer video, photo and sound coverage of European news. We also provide assistance for journalists wishing to cover EU subjects. Get the sights and sounds of Europe directly onto your screen via the Internet and via European broadcasting Service. All our materials are available in professional standards. European audiovisual material dating from the 1940s is also available.
We supply unbiased and reliable news services to broadcasters, news agencies, written press, and anyone who seeks to spread information on the activities carried out by the European Commission and other EU institutions.
On this site, we provide an overview of the products and distribution means on offer, as well as the technical services available in Brussels.
We are committed to expanding and adapting our products and services in order to offer you information you can trust because of its depth and its breadth, its speed and its accuracy. Information that is easy to find and to use, in fact, the information that you need.
Activities
Video
We cover Europe's news
Our teams ensure news coverage of events taking place in the institutions of the European Union: meetings, official visits, press conferences, signing of treaties. Wherever news happens, in Europe or elsewhere, major events in the construction of Europe and statements by major European personalities are recorded as they take place.
They are made immediately available to media professionals world-wide. Our live coverage of events, news summaries, info-clips, stockshots and photo reports illustrate the different EU activities and are aimed at helping the international media during the coverage of European events.
Photo
Picturing Europe
We deliver extensive photo coverage of all main EU-related news. From the European Coal and Steel Community to the latest EU events we offer photo coverage, in both black & white and colour, both of the founders of the European Community and the main events of the last half century of European history.
Available products include archive photos covering the main events since the 1950s on Community themes.
Audio
The voices of Europe
We provide daily news coverage in broadcast quality audio. The Audiovisual Library offers you voices of Europe expressed in its many languages in key speeches and declarations by key players in the construction of Europe as all major events, negotiations and agreements took place. The Audiovisual Library's sound archive footage covers the principal developments since World War II.
Distribution
Sights and Sounds on Air
The European broadcasting Service (EBS) provides EU related pictures and sound for professionals working in television and radio stations and for institutions. EBS is directly available to local, regional, national and international organisations in the Union, the Mediterranean area, and Central and Eastern Europe. EBS transmits a free to air signal via satellite and is also available via the Internet.
Live coverage, news summaries and stockshots
European broadcasting Service offers live coverage of the main EU events and live daily news broadcasts. In addition, EBS offers thematic footage illustrating the daily news and video news releases related to the integration process in Europe. These services are available in natural sound and in up to 24 languages a device that is unique in the world.
Sights and Sounds and Services online
The Internet provides an alternative to satellite transmissions. This service also allows on-demand consultation of any event or subject during the week following its transmission on satellite. All products become accessible to any connected media or individual anywhere in the world through the Internet portal of the audiovisual service. On the site you will find EBS permanently updated transmission schedule, as well as shotlists detailing the content of pictures and links to complementary information sources and photos. Pictures and sound may be downloaded in broadcast quality formats: MPEG-4 for video, MP3 for sound and JPEG for photos. This news material is published during or soon after the events, remains available for at least one month and is easy to download, process and file. Finally, you can enter your booking requests for the technical assistance that we describe hereafter.
Copyright
This material is offered free of charge for EU-related information and education purposes.Further details on our conditions of use are available in the
Copyright section
AVservice
Assistance on the spot
On location, we offer various services to radio and TV journalists covering the Europea
