Avid
® Audio-Video 
Editing Workflows

Legal Notices
Product specifications are subject to change without notice and do not represent a commitment on the part of Avid Technology, Inc.
This product is subject to the terms and conditions of a software license agreement provided with the software. The product may 
only be used in accordance with the license agreement.
Avid products or portions thereof are protected by one or more of the following United States Patents: 5,267,351; 5,355,450; 
5,396,594; 5,440,348; 5,528,310; 5,557,423; 5,577,190; 5,584,006;  5,724,605; 5,726,717; 5,745,637; 5,752,029; 5,754,851; 
5,812,216; 5,905,841; 5,930,445; 5,959,610, 6,057,829, 6,091,778, 6,105,083, 6,118,444, 6,141,691, 6,160,548, 6,201,531; 
6,269,195; 6,330,369; 6,336,093, 6,353,862, 6,404,435; 6,407,775, 6,426,778; 6,477,271, 6,489,969; 6,512,522; 6,546,190; 
6,552,731, 6,553,142; 6,570,624; 6,571,255, 6,583,824; 6,618,547; ,665,450; 6,678,461; 6,687,407; 6,704,445; 6,728,682, 
6,747,705; 66,763,134,6,766,063; 6,791,556; 6,810,157, 6,847,373; 6,871,003; 6,871,161, 6,901,211; 6,907,191; 6,928,187, 
7,043,058; 7,081,900; 7,103,231; 7,145,567; 7,266,241, 7,280,117; 7,403,561; 7,433,519; 7,441,193, 7,545,957; 7,671,871; 
7,684,096; 7,725,812; 7,729,423; and D515,095, D396,853. Other patents are pending.
Avid products or portions thereof are protected by one or more of the following European Patents: 0506870; 0635188; 0674414; 
0752174; 0811290; 0811292; 0811293; 0857293; 0976108; 0988756; 1050048; 1068734; 1111910; 1173850; 1629675.  
Other patents are pending.
Avid products or portions thereof are protected by one or more of the following United States Patents: 5,267,351; 5,309,528; 
5,355,450; 5,396,594; 5,440,348; 5,467,288; 5,513,375; 5,528,310; 5,557,423; 5,577,190; 5,584,006; 5,640,601; 5,644,364; 
5,654,737; 5,724,605; 5,726,717; 5,745,637; 5,752,029; 5,754,851; 5,799,150; 5,812,216; 5,828,678; 5,842,014; 5,852,435; 
5,959,610, 5,986,584; 5,999,406; 6,038,573; 6,057,829, 6,069,668; 6,141,007; 6,211,869; 6,336,093, 6,532,043; 6,546,190; 
6,596,031;6,728,682, 6,747,705; 6,763,523; 6,766,357; 6,847,373; 7,081,900; 7,403,561; 7,433,519; 7,441,193, 7,671,871; 
7,684,096; D352,278; D372,478; D373,778; D392,267; D392,268; D392,269; D395,291; D396,853; D398,912. 
Other patents are pending.
Avid products or portions thereof are protected by one or more of the following European Patents: 0506870; 0635188; 0674414; 
0752174; 0811290; 0811292; 0811293; 1050048; 1111910; 1629675. Other patents are pending.
This document is protected under copyright law. An authorized licensee of Avid Media ComposerNewsCutterAvid Symphony Nitris 
may reproduce this publication for the licensee’s own use in learning how to use the software. This document may not be 
reproduced or distributed, in whole or in part, for commercial purposes, such as selling copies of this document or providing support 
or educational services to others. This document is supplied as a guide for Avid Media ComposerNewsCutter and NewsCutter 
XPAvid Symphony Nitris. Reasonable care has been taken in preparing the information it contains. However, this document may 
contain omissions, technical inaccuracies, or typographical errors. Avid Technology, Inc. does not accept responsibility of any kind 
for customers’ losses due to the use of this document. Product specifications are subject to change without notice.
Copyright © 2010 Avid Technology, Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved.
The following disclaimer is required by Apple Computer, Inc.:
APPLE COMPUTER, INC. MAKES NO WARRANTIES WHATSOEVER, EITHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, REGARDING THIS 
PRODUCT, INCLUDING WARRANTIES WITH RESPECT TO ITS MERCHANTABILITY OR ITS FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR 
PURPOSE. THE EXCLUSION OF IMPLIED WARRANTIES IS NOT PERMITTED BY SOME STATES. THE ABOVE EXCLUSION 
MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU. THIS WARRANTY PROVIDES YOU WITH SPECIFIC LEGAL RIGHTS. THERE MAY BE OTHER 
RIGHTS THAT YOU MAY HAVE WHICH VARY FROM STATE TO STATE.
The following disclaimer is required by Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics, Inc. for the use of their TIFF library:
Copyright © 1988–1997 Sam Leffler  
Copyright © 1991–1997 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software [i.e., the TIFF library] and its documentation for any purpose is 
hereby granted without fee, provided that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in all copies of the 
software and related documentation, and (ii) the names of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or 
publicity relating to the software without the specific, prior written permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED “AS-IS” AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, 
INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR 
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND, OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR 
PROFITS, WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, ARISING 
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
The following disclaimer is required by the Independent JPEG Group:
This software is based in part on the work of the Independent JPEG Group.

This Software may contain components licensed under the following conditions:
Copyright (c) 1989 The Regents of the University of California. All rights reserved. 
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
duplicated in all such forms and that any documentation, advertising materials, and other materials related to such distribution and 
use acknowledge that the software was developed by the University of California, Berkeley. The name of the University may not be 
used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. THIS SOFTWARE IS 
PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE 
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
Copyright (C) 1989, 1991 by Jef Poskanzer. 
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby 
granted, provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission notice 
appear in supporting documentation. This software is provided "as is" without express or implied warranty. 
Copyright 1995, Trinity College Computing Center. Written by David Chappell. 
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby 
granted, provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission notice 
appear in supporting documentation. This software is provided "as is" without express or implied warranty. 
Copyright 1996 Daniel Dardailler. 
Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided that the 
above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting 
documentation, and that the name of Daniel Dardailler not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software 
without specific, written prior permission. Daniel Dardailler makes no representations about the suitability of this software for any 
purpose. It is provided "as is" without express or implied warranty. 
Modifications Copyright 1999 Matt Koss, under the same license as above. 
Copyright (c) 1991 by AT&T. 
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any purpose without fee is hereby granted, provided that this entire 
notice is included in all copies of any software which is or includes a copy or modification of this software and in all copies of the 
supporting documentation for such software. 
THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTY. IN PARTICULAR, 
NEITHER THE AUTHOR NOR AT&T MAKES ANY REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE 
MERCHANTABILITY OF THIS SOFTWARE OR ITS FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
This product includes software developed by the University of California, Berkeley and its contributors.
The following disclaimer is required by Nexidia Inc.:
© 2010 Nexidia Inc.  All rights reserved, worldwide.  Nexidia and the Nexidia logo are trademarks of Nexidia Inc. All other 
trademarks are the property of their respective owners.  All Nexidia materials regardless of form, including without limitation, 
software applications, documentation and any other information relating to Nexidia Inc., and its products and services are the 
exclusive property of Nexidia Inc. or its licensors.  The Nexidia products and services described in these materials may be covered 
by Nexidia's United States patents: 7,231,351; 7,263,484; 7,313,521; 7,324,939; 7,406,415, 7,475,065; 7,487,086 and/or other 
patents pending and may be manufactured under license from the Georgia Tech Research Corporation USA. 
The following disclaimer is required by Paradigm Matrix:
Portions of this software licensed from Paradigm Matrix.
The following disclaimer is required by Ray Sauers Associates, Inc.:
“Install-It” is licensed from Ray Sauers Associates, Inc. End-User is prohibited from taking any action to derive a source code 
equivalent of “Install-It,” including by reverse assembly or reverse compilation, Ray Sauers Associates, Inc. shall in no event be liable 
for any damages resulting from reseller’s failure to perform reseller’s obligation; or any damages arising from use or operation of 
reseller’s products or the software; or any other damages, including but not limited to, incidental, direct, indirect, special or 
consequential Damages including lost profits, or damages resulting from loss of use or inability to use reseller’s products or the 
software for any reason including copyright or patent infringement, or lost data, even if Ray Sauers Associates has been advised, 
knew or should have known of the possibility of such damages.
The following disclaimer is required by Videomedia, Inc.:
“Videomedia, Inc. makes no warranties whatsoever, either express or implied, regarding this product, including warranties with 
respect to its merchantability or its fitness for any particular purpose.”

“This software contains V-LAN ver. 3.0 Command Protocols which communicate with V-LAN ver. 3.0 products developed by 
Videomedia, Inc. and V-LAN ver. 3.0 compatible products developed by third parties under license from Videomedia, Inc. Use of this 
software will allow “frame accurate” editing control of applicable videotape recorder decks, videodisc recorders/players and the like.” 
The following disclaimer is required by Altura Software, Inc. for the use of its Mac2Win software and Sample Source 
Code:
©1993–1998 Altura Software, Inc.
The following disclaimer is required by Ultimatte Corporation:
Certain real-time compositing capabilities are provided under a license of such technology from Ultimatte Corporation and are 
subject to copyright protection.
The following disclaimer is required by 3Prong.com Inc.:
Certain waveform and vector monitoring capabilities are provided under a license from 3Prong.com Inc.
The following disclaimer is required by Interplay Entertainment Corp.:
The “Interplay” name is used with the permission of Interplay Entertainment Corp., which bears no responsibility for Avid products.
This product includes portions of the Alloy Look & Feel software from Incors GmbH.
This product includes software developed by the Apache Software Foundation (http://www.apache.org/).
© DevelopMentor
This product may include the JCifs library, for which the following notice applies:
JCifs © Copyright 2004, The JCIFS Project, is licensed under LGPL (http://jcifs.samba.org/). See the LGPL.txt file in the Third Party 
Software directory on the installation CD.
Avid Interplay contains components licensed from LavanTech. These components may only be used as part of and in connection 
with Avid Interplay.
Attn. Government User(s). Restricted Rights Legend
U.S. GOVERNMENT RESTRICTED RIGHTS. This Software and its documentation are “commercial computer software” or 
“commercial computer software documentation.” In the event that such Software or documentation is acquired by or on behalf of a 
unit or agency of the U.S. Government, all rights with respect to this Software and documentation are subject to the terms of the 
License Agreement, pursuant to FAR §12.212(a) and/or DFARS §227.7202-1(a), as applicable.
Trademarks
003, 192 Digital I/O, 192 I/O, 96 I/O, 96i I/O, Adrenaline, AirSpeed, ALEX, Alienbrain, AME, AniMatte, Archive, Archive II, Assistant 
Station, AudioPages, AudioStation, AutoLoop, AutoSync, Avid, Avid Active, Avid Advanced Response, Avid DNA, Avid DNxcel, Avid 
DNxHD, Avid DS Assist Station, Avid Liquid, Avid Media Engine, Avid Media Processor, Avid MEDIArray, Avid Mojo, Avid Remote 
Response, Avid Unity, Avid Unity ISIS, Avid VideoRAID, AvidRAID, AvidShare, AVIDstripe, AVX, Axiom, Beat Detective, Beauty 
Without The Bandwidth, Beyond Reality, BF Essentials, Bomb Factory, Boom, Bruno, C|24, CaptureManager, ChromaCurve, 
ChromaWheel, Cineractive Engine, Cineractive Player, Cineractive Viewer, Color Conductor, Command|24, Command|8, Conectiv, 
Control|24, Cosmonaut Voice, CountDown, d2, d3, DAE, Dazzle, Dazzle Digital Video Creator, D-Command, D-Control, Deko, 
DekoCast, D-Fi, D-fx, Digi 003, DigiBase, DigiDelivery, Digidesign, Digidesign Audio Engine, Digidesign Development Partners, 
Digidesign Intelligent Noise Reduction, Digidesign TDM Bus, DigiLink, DigiMeter, DigiPanner, DigiProNet, DigiRack, DigiSerial, 
DigiSnake, DigiSystem, Digital Choreography, Digital Nonlinear Accelerator, DigiTest, DigiTranslator, DigiWear, DINR, DNxchange, 
DPP-1, D-Show, DSP Manager, DS-StorageCalc, DV Toolkit, DVD Complete, D-Verb, Eleven, EM, Euphonix, EUCON, EveryPhase, 
Expander, ExpertRender, Fader Pack, Fairchild, FastBreak, Fast Track, Film Cutter, FilmScribe, Flexevent, FluidMotion, Frame 
Chase, FXDeko, HD Core, HD Process, HDPack, Home-to-Hollywood, HYBRID, HyperControl, HyperSPACE, HyperSPACE 
HDCAM, iKnowledge, Image Independence, Impact, Improv, iNEWS, iNEWS Assign, iNEWS ControlAir, Instantwrite, Instinct, 
Intelligent Content Management, Intelligent Digital Actor Technology, IntelliRender, Intelli-Sat, Intelli-sat Broadcasting Recording 
Manager, InterFX, Interplay, inTONE, Intraframe, iS Expander, ISIS, IsoSync, iS9, iS18, iS23, iS36, ISIS, IsoSync, KeyRig, 
KeyStudio, LaunchPad, LeaderPlus, LFX, Lightning, Link & Sync, ListSync, LKT-200, Lo-Fi, Luna, MachineControl, Magic Mask, 
Make Anything Hollywood, make manage move | media, Marquee, MassivePack, Massive Pack Pro, M-Audio, M-Audio Micro, 
Maxim, Mbox, Media Composer, MediaFlow, MediaLog, MediaMatch, MediaMix, Media Reader, Media Recorder, MEDIArray, 
MediaServer, MediaShare, MetaFuze, MetaSync, MicroTrack, MIDI I/O, Midiman, Mix Rack, MixLab, Moviebox, Moviestar, 
MultiShell, NaturalMatch, NewsCutter, NewsView, Nitris, NL3D, NLP, Nova, NRV-10 interFX, NSDOS, NSWIN, Octane, OMF, OMF 
Interchange, OMM, OnDVD, Open Media Framework, Open Media Management, Ozone, Ozonic, Painterly Effects, Palladium, 
Personal Q, PET, Pinnacle, Pinnacle DistanTV, Pinnacle GenieBox, Pinnacle HomeMusic, Pinnacle MediaSuite, Pinnacle Mobile 
Media, Pinnacle Scorefitter, Pinnacle Studio, Pinnacle Studio MovieBoard, Pinnacle Systems, Pinnacle VideoSpin, Podcast Factory, 
PowerSwap, PRE, ProControl, ProEncode, Profiler, Pro Tools LE, Pro Tools M-Powered, Pro Transfer, Pro Tools, QuickPunch, 
QuietDrive, Realtime Motion Synthesis, Recti-Fi, Reel Tape Delay, Reel Tape Flanger, Reel Tape Saturation, Reprise, Res Rocket 
Surfer, Reso, RetroLoop, Reverb One, ReVibe, Revolution, rS9, rS18, RTAS, Salesview, Sci-Fi, Scorch, Scorefitter, ScriptSync, 

SecureProductionEnvironment, Serv|LT, Serv|GT, Session, Shape-to-Shape, ShuttleCase, Sibelius, SIDON, SimulPlay, 
SimulRecord, Slightly Rude Compressor, Smack!, Soft SampleCell, Soft-Clip Limiter, Solaris, SoundReplacer, SPACE, SPACEShift, 
SpectraGraph, SpectraMatte, SteadyGlide, Streamfactory, Streamgenie, StreamRAID, Strike, Structure, Studiophile, SubCap, 
Sundance Digital, Sundance, SurroundScope, Symphony, SYNC HD, Synchronic, SynchroScope, SYNC I/O, Syntax, TDM 
FlexCable, TechFlix, Tel-Ray, Thunder, Titansync, Titan, TL Aggro, TL AutoPan, TL Drum Rehab, TL Everyphase, TL Fauxlder, TL In 
Tune, TL MasterMeter, TL Metro, TL Space, TL Utilities, tools for storytellers, Torq, Torq Xponent, Transfuser, Transit, TransJammer, 
Trigger Finger, Trillium Lane Labs, TruTouch, UnityRAID, Vari-Fi, Velvet, Video the Web Way, VideoRAID, VideoSPACE, VideoSpin, 
VTEM, Work-N-Play, Xdeck, X-Form, Xmon, XPAND!, Xponent, X-Session, and X-Session Pro are either registered trademarks or 
trademarks of Avid Technology, Inc. in the United States and/or other countries.
Adobe and Photoshop are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Adobe Systems Incorporated in the United States and/or 
other countries. Apple and Macintosh are trademarks of Apple Computer, Inc., registered in the U.S. and other countries. Windows 
is either a registered trademark or trademark of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other countries. All other 
trademarks contained herein are the property of their respective owners. 
Footage
Arri — Courtesy of Arri/Fauer — John Fauer, Inc. 
Bell South “Anticipation” — Courtesy of Two Headed Monster — Tucker/Wayne Atlanta/GMS. 
Canyonlands — Courtesy of the National Park Service/Department of the Interior. 
Eco Challenge British Columbia — Courtesy of Eco Challenge Lifestyles, Inc., All Rights Reserved.  
Eco Challenge Morocco — Courtesy of Discovery Communications, Inc. 
It’s Shuttletime — Courtesy of BCP & Canadian Airlines.  
Nestlé Coffee Crisp — Courtesy of MacLaren McCann Canada.  
Saturn “Calvin Egg” — Courtesy of Cossette Communications.  
“Tigers: Tracking a Legend” — Courtesy of www.wildlifeworlds.com, Carol Amore, Executive Producer. 
"The Big Swell" — Courtesy of Swell Pictures, Inc. 
Windhorse — Courtesy of Paul Wagner Productions.
Arizona Images — KNTV Production — Courtesy of Granite Broadcasting, Inc.,  
Editor/Producer Bryan Foote. 
Canyonlands — Courtesy of the National Park Service/Department of the Interior. 
Ice Island — Courtesy of Kurtis Productions, Ltd. 
Tornados + Belle Isle footage — Courtesy of KWTV News 9. 
WCAU Fire Story — Courtesy of NBC-10, Philadelphia, PA. 
Women in Sports – Paragliding — Courtesy of Legendary Entertainment, Inc.
Avid Audio-Video Editing Workflows • October 2011


7
Contents
Chapter 1
Post-Production Editing Workflows for Film and Television . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
Overview of Production Workflows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
Chapter 2
Supported Pro Tools Configurations for Video I/O and Monitoring. . . . . .  14
Pro Tools Basic Video Import . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
Pro Tools with Avid Video Peripherals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
Pro Tools Video Satellite System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
Chapter 3
Exchanging Projects between Avid Audio and Video Editing Systems . .  18
Methods of Transferring Projects between Audio and Video Editing Applications . . . . .  18
AAF or OMF? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
Linked or Embedded Media? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
Unified Nomenclature for Audio and Video Editing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
Checklists for Audio/Video Editing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
Checklist: Exporting a Sequence to Pro Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
Checklist: Importing a Sequence from the Avid Video Editing Application . . . . . . . . . . .  27
Checklist: Sending the Audio Mix to the Video Editing Application. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
Checklist: Importing the Audio Mix into the Video Editing Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
Checklist: Exchanging Project Files between Co-installed Audio & Video  
Editing Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
Exporting Sequences from Avid Video Editing Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  36
Exporting AAF Sequences with Special Options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  36
Opening a Sequence on a Video Satellite System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  39
Chapter 4
Interoperability Support for Avid  
Audio & Video Editing Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  40
Hardware Solutions for Avid Audio and Video Editing Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  40
Video I/O and Monitoring Options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  40
Control Surface Options. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  42
Shared Storage Options. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  42
Co-Editing with Avid Audio and Video Editing Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43
Avid Media Composer Support for Pro Tools. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43
Avid Pro Tools Support for Media Composer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  44
Transferring Projects and Media between Audio and Video Editing Applications. . . . . .  45

 
8

1
Post-Production Editing Workflows for 
Film and Television
Production companies, post houses, and audio post facilities need to stay connected and in 
constant contact to meet tight deadlines and stringent quality requirements. Offline editing, 
sound post, effects and graphics work can take place at different facilities, and Avid editing tools 
and interconnectivity solutions support the file interchange workflows between these specialized 
post facilities.
This guide describes best practices recommended by Avid specifically for audio and video 
editing. The products discussed in this guide include the Avid Pro Tools audio editing application 
and the Avid video editing applications—Media Composer, Symphony and NewsCutter. (The 
name Media Composer is used throughout this guide as a reference to the Avid video editing 
applications.)
Where necessary, this guide also refers you to other product documentation for more details.
Overview of Production Workflows
The illustration below shows a typical workflow where offline/online editing of audio and video 
components are conducted within the same facility. It shows the workflow between standalone 
editing systems, as well as how they can be integrated within a larger network interconnecting 
audio and post houses.

Overview of Production Workflows
10
Acquisition
You can capture and edit footage from tape or from digital file format (originating from digital 
cameras or CGI applications) directly into the video editing application. If you receive footage 
from a traditional film reel, you need to either scan it to file or transfer it through Telecine onto 
tape in a digital HD format. 
The sound is usually recorded separately on a digital audio system, such as a BWF file-based 
recorder, or a field recorder. The audio can be captured directly from the recorder, and synced 
with the video during the editing process.
Video Editing in Media Composer
You can perform all your video editing with Avid Media Composer, and even create some basic 
audio tracks with surround sound and audio effects, that can later be sweetened in Pro Tools. 
Interplay Stream Publish Service
   
Avid ISIS
Avid Interplay Engine
Interplay Transcode Service
   
Hi-Res ingest
Lo-Res ingest
Avid AirSpeed
Multi Stream
Hi-Res playout
Avid Media Composer
   
ACQUISITION
OUTPUT & 
DISTRIBUTION
PRODUCTION
INTERCONNECTED SOLUTIONS
FILM
DELIVERABLES
VIDEO
DELIVERABLES 
(HD, SD, DVD, BLU-RAY)
TELECINE
HD 4:4:4
Avid Pro Tools
   
SCANNER
DPX
R3D
ARRI
QuickTime
CG
TIF
WEB
DELIVERABLES
STANDALONE SOLUTIONS
AAF/OMF
ARCHIVE
RESTORE
Video Editing
Audio Editing
BWF
Storage
Hi-Res
Transcoded media
SHARE
MEDIA

Overview of Production Workflows
11
The key to maintaining a high level of interoperability between Media Composer and Pro Tools 
is to use an AAF file. This is currently the best format for transferring and reassembling the 
sequence or session composition from one application to another. 
In Media Composer, you can export the audio tracks to an AAF, as well as perform separate 
exports of the media files (e.g. QuickTime or MXF). If the destination Pro Tools system has an 
Avid video peripheral or a Video Satellite system, you can also export Avid video tracks as part 
of the AAF.
Audio Editing in Pro Tools
When you open an AAF in Pro Tools, it will populate a new session with all the audio media 
and/or video metadata needed to recreate any initial edits done in Media Composer. This 
includes any markers placed on the timeline by the video editor to indicate where sound effects 
need to be added.
During the editing session, you can enhance and improve the rough audio track (also known as 
the “guide track”) produced by the video editor, and use the markers to help spot where sound 
effects need to be added. You can also view any volume automation, clip gain or pan automation 
information imported for individual tracks and easily add and manipulate break points using the 
Pro Tools editing functions.
n You can also edit with accompanying video in Pro Tools by either importing and viewing a 
QuickTime file, capturing with an attached video peripheral, or viewing playback from a 
connected Media Composer Video Satellite system—see “Supported Pro Tools Configurations 
for Video I/O and Monitoring” on page 14 for details.
You can then create any other necessary audio tracks for dialog, ADR, foley, music, and sound 
effects in either mono or stereo. When the final audio sweetening session is complete, mix it 
down, and export both the AAF and audio media back to Media Composer.
Conforming Audio
After audio is imported into a Pro Tools session from a video editing system, the project’s picture 
is often re-edited, which requires all of the audio to be re-edited to match the new picture 
changes. This process is known as conforming which involves cutting and re-editing audio to 
match new picture changes that have occurred since the last audio edits were made. Before the 
conforming of audio can occur, the video editing system usually outputs a text file called an EDL 
(Edit Decision List) with the new picture edits. The EDL can be used with a third-party 
conforming tool to match the changes to the sound track in Pro Tools.

Overview of Production Workflows
12
Export for Review or Final Delivery
When the project is completed, you can output and transfer the project for final delivery to the 
client. Depending on your client’s delivery specifications, you will need to either export final 
sequence with the combined video and audio, or deliver the audio and video components 
separately.
There are a variety of linear tape final delivery formats (such as Digital Betacam, DVC-Pro, 
DVCAM, and Timecode DAT), as well as digital file formats such as QuickTime, AAF, OMFI, 
WAV, AIFF, MXF, and MP3.
Editing on Interplay
The exchange process between Avid audio and video editing systems can be facilitated with 
Avid interconnectivity solutions. Media Composer, Symphony, NewsCutter, and Pro Tools 
systems support integration with Avid’s Interplay asset management system and shared storage. 
This allows workflows with greater speed, flexibility and team collaboration. Both post and 
broadcast facilities can configure a project-wide, multi-resolution workflow, that allow 
producers, assistants and editors to log, mark and edit large amounts of material quickly and 
accurately.
When connected to an Interplay system, Avid video editing systems can check in/out projects, 
sequences, and media from Interplay, created for or by Pro Tools.
When equipped with the Pro Tools Interplay Integration Option, Pro Tools can interact directly 
with Avid Interplay to:
•
Open AAF sequences directly from Interplay
•
Export the session and any new media back to the sequence on Interplay
•
Send sequences directly to 3rd-party playback servers, for live playback (Interplay Transfer 
option and Pro Tools Send to Playback web service required).
For more information on these workflows, see the Avid Editing on Interplay Workflow Guide (for 
video editors) and the Pro Tools Avid Interplay Guide (for audio editors).
Avid Editing Systems and Shared Storage
With an Avid shared storage solution, you can quickly increase collaboration in a post facility. 
There are Avid storage solutions for facilities with standalone editing systems, as well as larger 
networked systems requiring high-resolution storage and bandwidth.
Avid ISIS® and Unity MediaNetwork are high-speed network storage systems that let multiple 
users store and share media through a gigabit Ethernet or Fibre Channel connection.

Overview of Production Workflows
13
Pro Tools, Media Composer, Symphony, and NewsCutter can use a common shared storage 
system to share the same media as follows:
•
Stream audio and video media in real time
•
Share AAF or OMF audio and video sequences
•
Share audio and video media in a push-pull workflow (Mac and Windows)

2
Supported Pro Tools Configurations for 
Video I/O and Monitoring
There are three main types of Pro Tools system configurations for audio-video editing:
•
“Pro Tools Basic Video Import” on page 14
•
“Pro Tools with Avid Video Peripherals” on page 15
•
“Pro Tools Video Satellite System” on page 16
In addition, Pro Tools and Media Composer software can be installed on the same computer. For 
a table of compatible software versions, as well as a list of Pro Tools interfaces which can be 
used as audio I/O devices with Avid video editing applications, refer to the Co-Install Notes on 
the Avid Knowledge Base.
Pro Tools Basic Video Import
All Pro Tools systems can import and view QuickTime (SD and HD) movies in a floating 
window on the desktop. 
On Macintosh systems only, a PCIe BlackMagic card or DV transcoder can be installed in the 
Pro Tools system to play full resolution QuickTime files on a secondary video monitor. 
Avid Pro Tools
Audio I/O hardware
with embedded or linked
QuickTime  media
AAF/OMF sequence
Playback in external monitor
(only on Macintosh systems
with appropriate hardware)

Pro Tools with Avid Video Peripherals
15
Pro Tools with Avid Video Peripherals
Pro Tools and Avid video peripherals combine to support import and playback of QuickTime, 
and Avid MXF/OMF video media. 
When using an Avid video peripheral such as Mojo SDI with Pro Tools, you must have 
Pro Tools HD software running on HDX, HD Native, or Pro Tools|HD hardware with a 
synchronization peripheral (such as SYNC HD) in order to maintain near sample accurate 
audio/video sync.
While it is possible to use an Avid video peripheral without the presence of any hardware 
(Pro Tools software only), audio and video synchronization is not guaranteed.
In addition to the “Pro Tools Basic Video Import” on page 14, this system offers several 
advantages:
•
Import an AAF and copy/relink to existing Avid MXF video (SD) or audio media for 
playback in Pro Tools.
Avid Mojo SDI with the SYNC HD hardware, works with many popular Avid video 
resolutions, including uncompressed SD, DV25 and DV50, 15:1s, and several 24p/25p 
progressive-scan resolutions.
n All audio I/O is handled by the Pro Tools audio hardware.
Capture MXF Video (SD)
 directly to Timeline
Avid Mojo SDI
Audio I/O hardware
Avid Pro Tools HD
AAF/OMF sequence
with embedded or linked 
MXF/OMF or 
QuickTime media
SYNC HD
Playback in External Monitor
Capture audio

Pro Tools Video Satellite System
16
•
Import QuickTime video and playback via Mojo SDI.
•
Capture Avid video directly to the Pro Tools timeline.
•
Play back to an external SD-SDI, NTSC or PAL monitor.
•
Mojo SDI also offers simultaneous output to both broadcast monitors and tape, and features 
Genlock for video sync with external devices.
Pro Tools Video Satellite System
Pro Tools and a Media Composer with the video satellite option are known collectively as a 
Video Satellite system. Pro Tools HD software running on HDX, HD Native, or Pro Tools|HD 
hardware with a synchronization peripheral (such as SYNC HD) can play any Avid HD or SD 
sequence from a second dedicated computer running Avid Media Composer or Symphony 
software, in sync with a Pro Tools session.
The two computers are connected via Avid’s satellite Ethernet protocol. The Media Composer 
system supports the Avid Mojo DX and Nitris DX video peripherals for high quality output to an 
external HD NTSC or PAL monitor.
The Pro Tools system may consist of:
•
Pro Tools|HD, HD Native or HDX cards
•
One or more Avid HD audio interfaces (e.g. HD I/O, HD OMNI, and HD MADI)
Avid Pro Tools
Synchronized HD/SD 
video playback
 with Media Composer
SYNC HD
Audio I/O hardware
Video Reference
Locks Pro Tools 
audio clock
to video reference
Avid Media Composer
Nitris DX
Video I/O hardware
Ethernet Connection

Pro Tools Video Satellite System
17
•
SYNC HD or SYNC I/O
•
Avid video I/O hardware (optional)
•
Video reference (connected to the SYNC HD or SYNC I/O)
•
Local and/or shared audio storage
•
Ethernet connection, either directly through an Ethernet hub or over a larger Ethernet 
network
The Media Composer/Symphony system consists of:
•
External monitor for video playback (optional) (NTSC, PAL or HD)
•
Avid video I/O hardware (optional)
•
Video reference (connected to the Avid video peripheral and the VTR, if present)
•
VTR (optional)
•
Keyspan USA-19HS adapter for 9-pin deck connection (Mac only)
•
RS-232 to RS-422 serial adapter (Mac only)
•
Local and/or shared storage for audio and video
•
Ethernet connection, either directly through an Ethernet hub or over a larger Ethernet  
network
Compared to “Pro Tools with Avid Video Peripherals” on page 15, the Video Satellite system 
offers the following additional advantages:
•
Eliminates the need to render effects, copy files, or do video mixdowns as the Media 
Composer Video Satellite system can simply open the Avid bin or sequence and play the 
picture exactly as it was seen in the video editing suite. It also takes the heavy load of video 
playback off the Pro Tools system.
The Video Satellite option enables loop playback and scrubbing of picture as well.
•
Media Composer/Symphony with the Video Satellite option can capture, output and 
playback synchronized video, through the video peripherals listed below.
Monitor
Required Peripherals
NTSC or PAL video monitor, 
HD-SDI video monitor, 
HDMI video monitor
Avid Nitris DX or Avid Mojo DX
Analog HD video monitor
Avid Nitris DX
Computer monitor using DVI output 
(Full-screen playback mode)
Available by default from the graphics card.

3
Exchanging Projects between Avid Audio 
and Video Editing Systems
Before you begin exchanging files between your Avid video and audio editing systems, make 
sure that you understand the possible workflows for the editing of audio and video—see 
“Overview of Production Workflows” on page 9.
You should also familiarize yourself with the various functions that support interoperability 
between Media Composer and Pro Tools—see “Interoperability Support for Avid Audio & 
Video Editing Applications” on page 40.
Methods of Transferring Projects between Audio and 
Video Editing Applications
AAF (Advanced Authoring Format) and OMF (Open Media Framework) are the two main 
industry-standard formats that you can use to exchange compositions and media between 
different applications and platforms. 
Avid editing applications can export an AAF or OMF file that contains the editing information 
(metadata) for the selected sequence, along with the video and audio media files for the master 
clips within the sequence. The media files can either be embedded or linked with the AAF or 
OMF file. 
When an editing application receives AAF or OMF sequence files, it uses the metadata to 
automatically and quickly reassemble the composition. A simple metaphor for this approach is 
that media files are the pieces of a puzzle and metadata is the set of instructions for assembling 
the puzzle.
•
“AAF or OMF?” on page 19
•
“Linked or Embedded Media?” on page 20
n Pro Tools can also export audio media files (such as AIFF and WAV) with an OMF wrapper 
which can be imported into Media Composer..

Methods of Transferring Projects between Audio and Video Editing Applications
19
AAF or OMF?
AAF sequences are the best way to exchange projects between your Avid video and audio 
editing applications. AAF is a more comprehensive standard of exchange and amongst many 
other media formats, it can also embed/refer to MXF media files which the OMF format cannot. 
Both AAF and OMF can store the editing metadata as well as the digital media (video, audio, 
graphics and animation) required to rebuild the composition in another editing application. 
However, not all settings may be saved in an OMF file, and therefore certain information may 
not be transferred to another application. Avid strongly recommends that you use AAF as it 
supports the latest features in Media Composer and Pro Tools.
Only AAF can exchange markers, export RTAS plug-ins, multichannel audio tracks, clip-based 
gain from Pro Tools, as well as support HD video. For a more detailed list of metadata that can 
be interchanged with each format, refer to “Interchange Support for AAF and OMF” on page 65.
AAF
AAF is a sequence file format. AAF sequences are the best way to exchange projects and 
maintain valuable metadata. An AAF sequence can refer to OMF and/or MXF media files, or 
have OMF and MXF media files embedded within them.
Pro Tools will import, play back, and export an AAF sequence that either links to media files or 
has audio embedded within it.
When you import an AAF file with embedded audio into Pro Tools, the audio will be extracted 
into the appropriate tracks using the current session’s audio file format.
OMF
OMF is both a media file and sequence format.
OMF media files can be audio or video, and Pro Tools can import and play back OMF audio and 
video media files. Pro Tools can also export OMF audio, but not OMF video media files.
An OMF sequence generated in an Avid video editing application cannot reference or have HD 
video embedded within it. Also, Pro Tools can import an OMF sequence with embedded audio, 
but not embedded video.
MXF
MXF is a media file format. There are MXF video files and MXF audio files, but there are no 
MXF sequences. An AAF sequence may refer to or include MXF media files, but OMF 
sequences cannot refer to or include MXF files.

Methods of Transferring Projects between Audio and Video Editing Applications
20
Pro Tools can import and play back MXF audio and video files created in Media Composer or 
other Avid applications.
n Video files digitized in Pro Tools are technically in the MXF format, but are intended only for use 
in Pro Tools and are not tested for compatibility with other applications.
Linked or Embedded Media?
There are two ways to handle media files when exporting AAF or OMF files—Embedded media 
(in which the media files are embedded in the sequence) versus Linked media (in which media 
files are referenced by the AAF or OMF sequence).
With both approaches, media can first be consolidated so that only the necessary portions of the 
media files are kept before embedding or linking them during the export process.
n You can also export sequences with media that is both embedded and linked. For example, the 
audio can be embedded, but the video linked.
Embedded Media
Embedding media results in one large OMF or AAF file containing both the sequence metadata 
and all associated media. Although it is easier to transfer a single file with embedded media, it is 
important to note that this file is also slower to export and import.
When Media Composer exports an embedded AAF, Pro Tools must copy and import the audio 
files.
Pro Tools imports just the audio media from an embedded AAF or OMF. If you have a 
Media Composer Video Satellite system, you can import AAF or OMF sequences containing 
embedded video files. In such a case, only the video metadata is imported onto a satellite track, 
and not the video media.

Methods of Transferring Projects between Audio and Video Editing Applications
21
Linked Media
Exporting AAF or OMF with linked media results in a metadata file (.AAF or .OMF) and any 
associated media stored as separate files. This keeps the size of the sequence file small and the 
export/import process becomes relatively fast.
Using the linked option is much more efficient especially when you have multiple media files to 
access within your sequence. However, you need to ensure these files are kept well organized 
since there are potentially numerous files to be transported between systems. 
Linked media is also beneficial and recommended in environments where both Media Composer 
and Pro Tools are installed, or where media is shared between the two systems. Large amounts of 
storage space can be saved by linking to the media instead of duplicating it.
When Media Composer exports a sequence with files that are linked, Pro Tools automatically 
links to these files when the AAF is imported.
n You cannot export an AAF with AMA-linked clips. You must transcode the media before 
exporting the AAF.
Avid Workstation Edited Sequence
Original Source Media Files
Export AAF/OMF with Embedded Media
creates ...
Sequence (metadata)
Consolidated Media Files
(with Handles)
Embedded AAF/OMF File (metadata and media)
Refers to:

Unified Nomenclature for Audio and Video Editing
22
Unified Nomenclature for Audio and Video Editing
To ease the workflows between the Avid audio and video editing applications, nomenclature 
changes have been made to certain tools and options in the Media Composer and Pro Tools 
applications.
New Nomenclature for Pro Tools 10
Avid Media Composer Edited Sequence
Export sequence edits
and file information
as AAF/OMF sequence
Pro Tools imports
Session file
Original Source Media Files
Translated Pro Tools Session File
AAF/OMF File (metadata only)
Linked to:
Old Term
New Term
Region
Clip
Region List
Clip List
Region Groups
Clip Groups
Region Clip indicator (rendered EA only)
Elastic Audio Processing Clipping indicator
Trimmer Tools
Trim Tools
Timeline selection start marker
Timeline Selection In Point
Timeline selection end marker
Timeline Selection Out Point

Unified Nomenclature for Audio and Video Editing
23
Additionally, “Digidesign” has been replaced with “Avid” for all file names and file path names.
New Nomenclature for Media Composer/Symphony/NewsCutter
Time Code
Timecode
Locators To Import (Import Session Data 
dialog)
Markers To Import (Import Session Data dialog)
Process (AudioSuite)
Render (AudioSuite)
Old Term
New Term
Old Name
New Name
Digidesing CoreAudio Manager
Avid Core Audio Manager
Digidesign CoreAudio Driver
Avid Core Audio Driver
Digidesign ASIO Driver
Avid ASIO Driver
DigiTest
Avid DigiTest
/Digidesign/Pro Tools/
Avid Pro Tools/
Old Term
New Term
Auto Gain
Volume
Auto Pan
Pan
Locator
Marker
Sample Bit Depth
Bit Depth
Enable/Disable (audio tracks)
Active/Inactive
Gang (audio faders only)
Group

Checklists for Audio/Video Editing
24
Checklists for Audio/Video Editing
Use the following checklists as guidelines when exchanging project files between the Avid video 
and audio editing systems.
If you are a smaller studio operator, or a single machine operator with an Avid video editing 
application and Pro Tools co-installed, then you only need to refer to the following checklist:
•
“Checklist: Exchanging Project Files between Co-installed Audio & Video Editing 
Applications” on page 32
If you are editing on a separate Avid video editing system, refer to the following depending on 
whether you are importing or exporting a sequence/session:
•
“Checklist: Exporting a Sequence to Pro Tools” on page 25
•
“Checklist: Importing the Audio Mix into the Video Editing Application” on page 31
If you are editing on a separate Avid Pro Tools system, refer to the following depending on 
whether you are importing or exporting a sequence/session:
•
“Checklist: Importing a Sequence from the Avid Video Editing Application” on page 27
•
“Checklist: Sending the Audio Mix to the Video Editing Application” on page 30
n For guidelines on exchanging sequences and media in an Interplay environment, refer to the 
Pro Tools Avid Interplay Guide.
n For version compatibility and any known limitations, refer to the Readme for the associated Avid 
products.

Checklist: Exporting a Sequence to Pro Tools
25
Checklist: Exporting a Sequence to Pro Tools
The following checklist contains some quick steps to send a sequence to Pro Tools for the audio 
sweetening session. If you require information on more custom options, refer to the topics in the 
Further reference column.
Step
Further reference
Setting up the storage:
There are many ways to exchange files between the audio and 
video editing systems. When using shared storage, media does not 
have to be duplicated. When you export your sequence, you have 
the benefit of linking to a common location for the audio or video 
media. Here are cases where you can use shared storage: 
•
Video and audio editing systems are on the same network and 
connected to Avid shared storage.
•
Video and audio editing applications are installed on the same 
system.
“Devices and Methods 
for Transferring Files” 
- Media Composer Help
Non-shared storage devices or electronic delivery methods can also 
be used to exchange files. The media can be consolidated before or 
during export. Both the sequence files and media need to be 
transferred and placed in a similar structure so that the appropriate 
links can be re-established on the receiving system.
“Transferring Project 
Files and Media Using 
Nonshared Storage” 
- Media Composer Help

If you are sharing storage with the audio editor, make sure that your 
system is connected to the storage that is most appropriate for the 
types of files that you will be transferring back and forth.
For shared storage such as an Avid ISIS, make sure the drive is 
mounted and that you have access to the appropriate workspace(s) 
where the project files and media are located.

Create the necessary exchange folders on your storage space.
We recommend that you create at least two folders for the exported 
sequence files—for example, one labeled ‘To Audio Editor’ and the 
other ‘From Audio Editor’.
Export the Sequence:

Duplicate the finished video sequence and name it appropriately. 
For example, Sequence_ForMix.

Before you begin the export process, read about the ways in which 
you can optimize your sequence for a quick and easy export.
“Preparing to Export a 
Sequence” 
- Media Composer Help

Checklist: Exporting a Sequence to Pro Tools
26

Set up an export template with options that streamline your specific 
production workflow—see the reference alongside for the 
recommended settings.
“Exporting Sequences 
from Avid Video Editing 
Applications” on 
page 36.
n Optionally, you can use the Export function. The Export 
dialog box also has an Export To Pro Tools template that can 
be modified and used for exporting your sequences and 
media.
“Exporting AAF 
Sequences with Special 
Options” on page 36.

Right-click on the duplicated sequence and choose the Send To > 
and the template that you set up for the export.

If necessary, enter a new file name for the exported sequence.
Click the Set button and select the storage location for the exported 
files.

Click Ok to begin the Export process. 
If you are doing a video mixdown, the export may take some time 
depending on the length and quality of the media.
The exported sequence will be displayed in the bin.

If you exported to a shared storage device, the sequence and 
any associated media are placed in the proper location for the 
audio editor.

If you are using a non-shared storage, then you need to 
copy/send the exported sequence and any linked media to the 
audio editor.
Step
Further reference

Checklist: Importing a Sequence from the Avid Video Editing Application
27
Checklist: Importing a Sequence from the Avid Video 
Editing Application
The following checklist outlines some quick steps to import a sequence from a video editing 
application, such as Media Composer, into Pro Tools for the audio sweetening session. If you 
require information on more custom options, refer to the topics in the Further reference 
column.
Step
Further reference
Set up the storage:
There are many ways to exchange files between the audio and video 
editing systems. When using shared storage, media does not have to 
be duplicated. When you export your sequence, you have the benefit 
of linking to a common location for the audio or video media. Here 
are cases where you can use shared storage: 
•
Video and audio editing systems are on the same network and 
connected to an Avid shared storage.
•
Video and audio editing applications are installed on the same 
system.
Non-shared storage devices or electronic delivery methods can also 
be used to exchange files. The media can be consolidated before or 
during export. Both the sequence files and media need to be 
transferred and placed in a similar structure so that the appropriate 
links can be re-established on the receiving system.

If you are sharing storage with the video editor, make sure that your 
system is connected to the storage.

For shared storage such as an Avid ISIS, make sure the drive is 
mounted and that you have access to the appropriate 
workspace(s) where the project files and media are located.

Checklist: Importing a Sequence from the Avid Video Editing Application
28

If the Pro Tools system is connected to a Video Satellite 
system, it is preferable to mount the video storage on the Pro 
Tools system.
Alternatively, you can mount the audio storage on the satellite 
system if you frequently use any of the following workflows:
•
You receive updated versions of AAF sequences with 
additional audio files.
•
You export audio from Pro Tools for import into Media 
Composer.
•
Your satellite system is connected to a shared storage 
system, but your Pro Tools system is not.
•
Your satellite system is connected to Avid Interplay, but 
your Pro Tools system is not.
“Cross-Mounting 
Media Storage on 
Remote Systems” 
- Avid Pro Tools 
Video Satellite Guide

We recommend that at least two folders should be available for the 
exported sequence files—one labeled ‘To Audio Editor’ and the 
other ‘From Audio Editor’.
Transfer the files:

If you are sharing storage between the audio and video editing 
systems, or if your audio and video editing applications are 
co-installed on the same system, then the files should already have 
been exported directly to the appropriate workspace or folder. 

If you are not sharing storage between the audio and video editing 
applications, copy the files that you received from the video editor 
to the appropriate folder on your audio storage.

Make sure that any alternate source files from your recordings (such 
as those from a field recorder) are also placed on your storage. 
These will need to be imported into Pro Tools.
“Field Recorder 
Workflows” 
- Pro Tools Help
Import the sequence for the mixing session:

Choose File > Open Session and navigate to the sequence that you 
want to import. 
Choose a place to save the session, then name it, and click Save.
This will create a new session with the correct parameters and 
automatically launch the Import Session Data dialog.
n Optionally, you can create a new session from a template, 
and import the sequence into it.
“Importing an AAF or 
OMF Sequence as a 
Pro Tools Session” 
- Pro Tools Help
Step
Further reference

Checklist: Importing a Sequence from the Avid Video Editing Application
29

In the Import Session Data dialog, select the options to import the 
track information and link to the media.
“Import Options when 
Importing AAF or 
OMF Sequences” 
- Pro Tools Help

Pro Tools supports a number of video playback functions that are 
dependant on the type of hardware configuration of your system.  
Here are some options if you want to view video media while 
performing your audio editing:
“Working with Video 
in Pro Tools” 
- Pro Tools Help

Link/import and view QuickTime files (SD or HD) in a 
floating window on the desktop. Choose File > Import > 
Video.
n Make sure you have QuickTime installed (Downloads 
are available on www.apple.com).
“Importing Video into 
Pro Tools” 
- Pro Tools Help

On Macintosh systems only. Link/import and view QuickTime 
files (SD or HD) on an external monitor with a supported 
Blackmagic card.

On Pro Tools systems with a connected Mojo SDI peripheral. 
Link/import and view Avid MXF/OMF, or QuickTime files 
(SD only), on an external monitor.
“Importing Sequences 
from Avid 
Applications” and 
“Digitizing Video to 
the Pro Tools 
Timeline” 
- Avid Video 
Peripherals Guide

On Video Satellite systems only. You can open and playback 
sequences with Avid SD/HD video (using the Full Screen 
playback mode, on an external monitor connected to Media 
Composer.
“Opening a Sequence 
on a Video Satellite 
System” on page 39.

Perform the necessary audio editing.

At this point in the workflow, the finished sequence with the new 
audio tracks can be sent on to the next stage of production. You have 
the following possible scenarios:

Review and approval via the video suite. The sequence can be 
exported back to the video editing application for playback, or 
to a playout server for transmission.
n You can only export audio tracks as AAF/OMF. This 
excludes auxiliary, master fader and MIDI tracks.
“Checklist: Sending 
the Audio Mix to the 
Video Editing 
Application” on 
page 30.
Step
Further reference

Checklist: Sending the Audio Mix to the Video Editing Application
30
Checklist: Sending the Audio Mix to the Video 
Editing Application
The following checklist outlines all the basic steps required to send a Pro Tools audio session 
back to a video editing application, such as Media Composer, for the final review and edit. If you 
require information on more custom options, refer to the topics in the Further reference 
column.

Layback to tape. If you have a tape deck attached to your 
system, you can layback an audio mix to create a tape master 
of your project.
“Arming Tracks 
Remotely for 
Layback”  
- Pro Tools 
MachineControl 
Guide

Bounce to file. Output a BWF/WAV mixdown of your session, 
or an MP3 for streaming and downloading audio over the 
Internet.
“Bounce to Disk”  
- Pro Tools Help
If you have a Video Satellite system, you can export the audio 
and video tracks to a QuickTime or Windows Media digital 
movie.
Exporting Audio and 
Video as a Digital 
Movie from a Video 
Satellite”  
- Avid Video Satellite 
Guide
Step
Further reference
Step
Further reference
Export the Mix:

After the audio sweetening session is complete, you can export the 
session as an AAF, or if the video editor only needs the resulting 
mix, export the audio session to a media file such as aiff, wav, or 
QuickTime.

To export the session metadata and/or media. 
Select the finished audio tracks, and choose File > Export 
Selected Tracks as New AAF/OMF.
Select the format for the exported media.
Navigate to the appropriate folder where the files will be 
exported, and click Save to begin the export.
“Exporting Pro Tools 
Tracks as AAF or 
OMFI Sequences” 
- Pro Tools Help

Checklist: Importing the Audio Mix into the Video Editing Application
31
Checklist: Importing the Audio Mix into the Video 
Editing Application
The following checklist outlines some quick steps to import an audio mix into an existing video 
sequence (in an application such as Media Composer), for the final editing and output. If you 
require information on more custom options, refer to the topics in the Further reference 
column.

If you exported to a shared storage device, the sequence and any 
associated media are placed in the proper location for the audio 
editor.

If you are using a non-shared storage, then you need to copy/send 
the exported sequence and any linked media to the audio editor.
Step
Further reference
Step
Further reference
Transfer the files:

If you are sharing storage between your audio and video editing 
systems, or if your audio and video editing applications are 
co-installed on the same system, then the files should already have 
been exported directly to the appropriate workspace or folder. 

If you are not sharing storage between the audio and video editing 
applications, copy the files that you received from the audio editor 
to the appropriate folder on your video storage. It’s important to 
save these files in a location where Media Composer expects 
them—see topic under Further reference for specific details.
“Transferring Project 
and Media Files Using 
Nonshared Storage” 
- Media Composer 
Help
Import the Mix:

Import the AAF and final media into the video editing system.
If the media was embedded in the AAF, Media Composer will 
extract the media on import and place it in the media files folder. If 
the media was linked, then the files will be automatically located if 
they were placed in the appropriate storage location.

Edit the final sequence in Media Composer.
Output the final sequence:

Output or export the final sequence. Here are your options:

Checklist: Exchanging Project Files between Co-installed Audio & Video Editing Applications
32
Checklist: Exchanging Project Files between 
Co-installed Audio & Video Editing Applications
The following checklist contains some quick steps to exchange project files on a system where 
both the video and audio editing applications are installed. If you require information on more 
custom options, refer to the topics in the Further reference column.

Create a digital cut to a tape master.
“Generating Output” 
- Media Composer 
Help

Export the sequence as a digital movie for final distribution or 
for further processing in another application.
“Exporting 
QuickTime Movies” 
or “Exporting as 
Windows Media” 
- Media Composer 
Help

Transfer completed sequences from your video editing system, 
to an AirSpeed system for playout to air.
“Playout”  
- AirSpeed Multi 
Stream Help
n In a newsroom environment you can use the Avid 
iNEWS® Command application to create your 
playlists.
Avid iNews Command 
User’s Guide
Step
Further reference
Step
Further reference
Co-installing Media Composer and Pro Tools:
Pro Tools and Media Composer software can be installed on the 
same computer. You must follow specific instructions to ensure that 
they perform correctly.
Co-Install Notes  
- Avid Knowledge Base
Setting up the storage:
Since your video and audio editing applications are installed on the 
same system, you have the benefit of linking to a common location 
for the audio or video media.

Checklist: Exchanging Project Files between Co-installed Audio & Video Editing Applications
33

Create the necessary exchange folders on your storage space.
We recommend that you create at least two folders for the exported 
sequence files—for example, one labeled ‘To Audio’ and the other 
‘From Audio’.
Export the Sequence from the video editing application:

Duplicate the finished video sequence and name it appropriately. 
For example, Sequence_ForMix.

Before you begin the export process, read about the ways in which 
you can optimize your sequence for a quick and easy export.
“Preparing to Export a 
Sequence” 
- Media Composer Help

Optional. Set up an export template with options that streamline 
your specific production workflow—see the reference alongside for 
the recommended settings.
“Exporting Sequences 
from Avid Video Editing 
Applications” on 
page 36.
n Alternatively, you can use the Export function. The Export 
dialog box also has an Export To Pro Tools template that can 
be modified and used for exporting your sequences and 
media.
“Exporting AAF 
Sequences with Special 
Options” on page 36.

Right-click on the duplicated sequence and choose the Send To > 
Pro Tools option or use the template that you set up for the export.

If necessary, enter a new file name for the exported sequence.
Click the Set button and select the storage location for the exported 
files.

Click Ok to begin the Export process. 
If you are doing a video mixdown, the export may take some time 
depending on the length and quality of the media.
The exported sequence will be displayed in the bin. The AAF 
sequence and any associated media are placed in the proper 
location for access by the audio editing application.
Import the sequence into Pro Tools:
Step
Further reference

Checklist: Exchanging Project Files between Co-installed Audio & Video Editing Applications
34

Choose File > Open Session and navigate to the sequence that you 
want to import. 
Choose a place to save the session, then name it, and click Save.
This will create a new session with the correct parameters and 
automatically launch the Import Session Data dialog.
n Optionally, you can create a new session from a template, 
and import the sequence into it.
“Importing an AAF or 
OMF Sequence as a Pro 
Tools Session” 
- Pro Tools Help

In the Import Session Data dialog, select the options to import the 
track information and link to the media.
n If you are re-importing a sequence from Media Composer 
into an existing Pro Tools session, we do not recommend that 
you select the Match Tracks button as this overwrites the 
existing tracks and you’d lose any changes that were made.  
 
Instead, make sure that you import to new tracks, and then 
compare the new tracks and manually fix any timing changes 
on the tracks on which you were already working.
“Import Options when 
Importing AAF or OMF 
Sequences” 
- Pro Tools Help

Pro Tools supports a number of video playback functions that are 
dependant on the type of hardware configuration of your system.  
Here are some options if you want to view video media while 
performing your audio editing:
“Working with Video in 
Pro Tools” 
- Pro Tools Help

Import and view SD or HD QuickTime files in a floating 
window on the desktop. Choose File > Import > Video or 
Audio.
n Make sure you have QuickTime installed (Downloads 
are available on www.apple.com).
“Importing Video into 
Pro Tools” 
- Pro Tools Help

On Macintosh systems only. Import and view SD or HD 
QuickTime files on an external monitor with a supported 
Blackmagic card.

With a connected Mojo SDI peripheral. Import and view Avid 
MXF or OMF files, or SD QuickTime files on an external 
monitor.
“Importing Sequences 
from Avid Applications”  
- Avid Video Peripherals 
Guide

On systems with Pro Tools HDX, HD Native, or HD 
hardware only. Digitize video directly to the Pro Tools video 
track.
“Digitizing Video to the 
Pro Tools Timeline 
- Avid Video Peripherals 
Guide
Step
Further reference

Checklist: Exchanging Project Files between Co-installed Audio & Video Editing Applications
35

Perform the necessary audio editing.

At this point in the workflow, the finished sequence with the new 
audio tracks can be sent on to the next stage of production. You 
have the following possible scenarios:

Review and approval via the video suite. The sequence can be 
exported back to the video editing application for playback, 
or to a playout server for transmission.
n You can only export audio tracks as AAF/OMF. This 
excludes auxiliary, master fader and MIDI tracks.
“Checklist: Sending the 
Audio Mix to the Video 
Editing Application” on 
page 30.

Layback to tape. If you have a tape deck attached to your 
system, you can layback an audio mix to create a tape master 
of your project.
“Arming Tracks 
Remotely for Layback”  
- Pro Tools 
MachineControl Guide

Bounce to file. Output a BWF/WAV mixdown of your 
session, or an MP3 for streaming and downloading audio 
over the Internet.
You can also bounce your mix to an iTunes library, or to the 
SoundCloud social audio sharing site.
“Bounce to Disk”  
- Pro Tools Help
Import the Mix into the video editing application:

Import the AAF and final media into the video editing system.
If the media was embedded in the AAF, Media Composer will 
extract the media on import and place it in the media files folder. If 
the media was linked, then the files will be automatically located if 
they were placed in the appropriate storage location.

Edit the final sequence in Media Composer.
Output the final sequence:

Output or export the final sequence. Here are your options:

Create a digital cut to a tape master.
“Generating Output” 
- Media Composer Help

Export the sequence as a digital movie for final distribution 
or for further processing in another application.
“Exporting QuickTime 
Movies” or “Exporting 
as Windows Media” 
- Media Composer Help
Step
Further reference

Exporting Sequences from Avid Video Editing Applications
36
Exporting Sequences from Avid Video Editing 
Applications
Projects created on an Avid video editing system (such as Avid Media Composer) can be 
exported as AAF or OMF 2.0 sequences, and imported into Pro Tools with an Avid video 
peripheral. This exchange of data between applications is significantly faster and easier than 
other methods, such as laying off to tape and re-digitizing.
n When exporting sequences from an Avid application, AAF is the recommended format because it 
carries more data and is more recognized than OMF as a standard.
When an AAF or OMF sequence exported from Avid software is imported into Pro Tools, one 
video track will display each of the video files as clips in the Edit window. Generally, these 
reflect the same clips on the Avid timeline, unless an effect spans more than one video clip.
All video effects, including fades, titles and multi-stream effects, must be rendered before they 
can be exported in an AAF or OMF 2.0 sequence for import into Pro Tools. Rendering means 
that a media file called a “precompute” is created. This precompute is what is referenced by the 
exported sequence and what appears in the Pro Tools Edit window. For example, if there are 
three video clips in the Avid timeline and a title effect is laid across all three, the title would have 
to be rendered before export, creating a single precompute file. Then, instead of seeing the three 
original video files in the Pro Tools Edit window, only the one pre compute clip will be 
displayed.
Pro Tools with an Avid video peripheral can import and play sequences containing one or more 
single-stream clips, video editing metadata video tracks, or video mixdown tracks.
Exporting AAF Sequences with Special Options
You can make the export process much more efficient by choosing the right options for your 
workflow. You can even use Send To templates to create an export operation that uses up to two 
export templates without you having to export a sequence multiple times. (Avid applications can 
also export directly to Avid Interplay.)

Exporting Sequences from Avid Video Editing Applications
37
When choosing your export settings for audio, consider the following:
•
Editing systems connected to shared storage can export a sequence linking directly to the 
source audio files. If desired, the audio editor can also choose to consolidate the audio files 
to a dedicated workspace when importing them into Pro Tools.
When choosing your export settings for video, consider the following:
•
QuickTime video is mandatory if you do not have an Avid video peripheral (e.g. Mojo SDI) 
or if you're not using Video Satellite. An alternative to creating a complete QuickTime 
movie file (when you're working on shared storage) is to export a QuickTime reference file 
that links directly to the source files. This makes for a much faster export.
•
If you DO have an Avid video peripheral then you could potentially link directly to the video 
files on shared storage (no need to consolidate first), as long as (a) they are SD, (b) they are 
of a format that the peripheral supports in conjunction with Pro Tools, and (c) all video 
effects in the sequence are rendered. If the sequence is HD, or uses video of an unsupported 
format, then you need to either transcode or mixdown the video first.
•
If you are using a Video Satellite system then no processing (rendering, consolidating, 
transcoding, mixdown etc) needs to take place as the Video Satellite can link directly to the 
source files regardless of SD/HD, format, unrendered effects etc.
To create a custom Send To template:
1. Right-click on a clip or sequence in a bin.
2. Select File > Send To > Make New.
3. (Option) Type a new file name in the Filename text box. 
4. The following are some recommended settings based on whether you are linking to media 
(shared storage) or creating new media to send to Pro Tools:
Export Settings for Pro Tools
Export Setting
Options for linking to existing media
Consolidate - Link 
Audio and Video
Consolidates the audio and video media, and then exports AAF 
metadata only (no media is exported). Pro Tools will link to, or 
reference, the Avid audio or video files located on Avid shared storage. 
Link To Audio only 
or 
Link To Audio and 
Video
Exports AAF metadata only (no media is exported). Pro Tools will link 
to, or reference, the Avid audio or video files located on Avid shared 
storage. This is the fastest method of export.
Link to Audio and 
Video Mixdown
First creates flattened audio and video mixdowns of the tracks. The 
AAF then links to the Avid audio and video mixdown (MXF) files 
located on Avid shared storage.

Exporting Sequences from Avid Video Editing Applications
38
n To export AAFs larger than 2 GB (which is usually the case when embedding video), the AAF 
Edit Protocol option must be checked in order for the editing application to perform the export.
5. (Option) Do the following if you want the third-party application to automatically launch 
after you export.
a.
(Option) Click the Auto Launch button, and select Add Item. 
b.
(Option) Browse to find the third-party application.
c.
Click Open.
d.
Select Auto Load Exported File(s) if you want the files you export to automatically load 
in the third-party application.
e.
Select Reveal file if you want the system to search available drives, open Windows 
Explorer or the folder (Macintosh), and highlight related media files.
6. Make any changes to the Export settings that you need by clicking the appropriate Options 
button, making the changes, and then clicking Save.
7. Click OK.
The Save As dialog opens. 
8. Name the new Send To (.stt) template.
9. Click Save and the new template will now be available as a Send To menu command.
Pro Tools Quicktime 
(Ref)
Creates a QuickTime reference file that points to the source audio or 
video files. When the QuickTime Ref is imported into Pro Tools, it 
links to the associated source audio/video files.
Export Setting
Options for creating new media
Send to QT Movie
Creates a QuickTime movie, consolidates the audio, and embeds the 
audio into the AAF file. (You can also select the option to include 
video).
When exporting a DV movie to Pro Tools, do not enable 'use Avid 
Codec'. If an Avid-codec DV movie is imported into Pro Tools, you 
cannot play it unless you have installed an Avid video peripheral.
Consolidate - Embed 
Audio only
Creates a video mixdown of the tracks (MXF), consolidates the audio, 
and embeds the audio into the AAF file. (Even on shared storage it's 
good practice to consolidate audio to a separate workspace specifically 
for Pro Tools.)
Export Setting
Options for linking to existing media

Opening a Sequence on a Video Satellite System
39
Opening a Sequence on a Video Satellite System
If you are using a Video Satellite System, certain steps must be taken to open a sequence for 
playback. This topic is designed to provide a quick start. For more details of all the other possible 
options, refer to the Avid Video Satellite Guide.
Open the sequence in Media Composer Video Satellite:
1. Open a new project.
2. Right-click in the bin, and choose Import.
3. Navigate to the folder where the files are located, select the video sequence, and click 
Import.
4. Drag and drop the sequence into the Record Monitor.
If you are not using shared storage (or Interplay), then do the following:
-
Right-click on the sequence and choose the option to “Send To”. Make sure to link to 
the video and consolidate the audio.
-
Export the AAF sequence and audio files to the proper storage location.
Open the session in Pro Tools:
1. Open a blank session and choose Import > Session Data.
2. Open the AAF sequence that was exported from the Video Satellite and select the following 
options:
-
Set V1 to New Satellite Track
-
Link to source media
3. Activate the satellite (Shift+Alt+L).
You can view the video in Full Screen Playback mode, or in an external monitor connected 
to the Video Satellite system.

4
Interoperability Support for Avid 
Audio & Video Editing Applications
There are many features that support input/output, file interchange and media sharing between 
audio and video editing applications. The products covered here include Avid Pro Tools 10, 
Media Composer 6, Symphony 6 and NewsCutter 10. New features in these releases have been 
highlighted in the support tables. 
•
“Hardware Solutions for Avid Audio and Video Editing Applications” on page 40
•
“Co-Editing with Avid Audio and Video Editing Applications” on page 43
•
“Transferring Projects and Media between Audio and Video Editing Applications” on 
page 45
For a listing of compatible software versions, as well as supported audio and video I/O interfaces 
for the audio and video editing applications, refer to the Co-Install Notes on the Avid Knowledge 
Base.
Hardware Solutions for Avid Audio and Video Editing 
Applications
Avid provides a number of hardware solutions for input/output, video monitoring, surface 
controllers, and shared storage for the Media Composer and Pro Tools family of products.
•
“Video I/O and Monitoring Options” on page 40
•
“Control Surface Options” on page 42
Video I/O and Monitoring Options
Avid supports various video input/output and monitoring devices for integrated picture solutions 
and direct interoperability with ICON workstations. Refer to the appropriate section below for 
your Avid editing application. 

Hardware Solutions for Avid Audio and Video Editing Applications
41
Supported Options for the Media Composer Family
Supported Options for the Pro Tools Family
Feature
Refer to
Integration with Pro Tools Hardware and Peripherals
•
Install Media Composer with the new versions of 
Pro Tools hardware and peripherals, including the HD 
Native and Pro Tools|HD cards. You can use the same 
audio hardware for both audio and video editing 
applications.
Avid HD Native and 
Pro Tools|HD Hardware 
Configuration for Editing 
Systems 
- Media Composer Help
•
Use supported Pro Tools audio devices for input/output 
operations.
Co-installation 
Configurations and Audio 
Device Support 
- Media Composer 
Readme
Using Mbox Family Audio 
Devices 
- Media Composer Help
Feature
Refer to
Near-Sample Accurate Lock for Pro Tools HDX, HD 
Native and HD Hardware
Use SYNC peripherals to keep your audio-video productions 
in total sync. SYNC HD attains near sample-accurate lock to 
serial timecode (through RS-422), LTC, or bi-phase/tach 
signals, as well as standard pull-up/pull-down rates for film 
and video applications.
Avid SYNC HD Guide
Peripherals for SD Video Capture 
Use Avid video I/O peripherals such as Mojo SDI to capture 
or playback standard definition video in the Pro Tools 
timeline. 
Avid Video Peripherals 
Guide

Hardware Solutions for Avid Audio and Video Editing Applications
42
Control Surface Options
There are various Avid control surfaces to give you tactile control of track volume, panning, 
plug-ins, transport and other vital recording, mixing/editing operations. Refer to the appropriate 
section below for your Avid editing application.
Supported Options for the Media Composer Family
Shared Storage Options
Pro Tools and Avid video editing applications can use Avid ISIS 7000, ISIS 5000, and Unity 
MediaNetwork high-speed network storage systems to share the same media as follows:
Peripherals for HD Video Capture 
Use Media Composer Video Satellite for synchronized video 
playback, capture, and conversion of HD media in Pro Tools. 
Video Satellite is a software option that allows you to quickly 
and easily play Avid HD video sequences from a dedicated 
Mac or Windows-based computer, running Avid Media 
Composer software (with attached Mojo DX or Nitrix DX 
peripherals). 
Avid Video Satellite Guide
Feature
Refer to
Feature
Refer to
Integration with Audio Controllers
•
EUCON™ integration: Use Avid Artist Control, Avid 
Artist Transport, and Avid Artist Mix with your Avid 
editing application for audio navigation and transport 
functions, as well as some video and audio editing 
features such as recording volume automation. 
Using Avid Artist Series 
Controllers  
- Media Composer Help
Feature
Refer to
•
Push/pull audio and video media
•
Share AAF, OMF, and MXF audio and video sequences
Pro Tools ISIS Guide and 
the Pro Tools Avid 
MediaNetwork Guide
•
Stream audio and video media in real time. 
NEW
•
Increased track counts and Mac streaming support for 
Pro Tools on ISIS 7000 and Avid Unity MediaNetwork.

Co-Editing with Avid Audio and Video Editing Applications
43
Co-Editing with Avid Audio and Video Editing 
Applications
n Avid Pro Tools and Media Composer can be installed on the same computer. Refer to the 
Co-Install Notes on the Avid Knowledge Base.
•
“Avid Media Composer Support for Pro Tools” on page 43
•
“Avid Pro Tools Support for Media Composer” on page 44
Avid Media Composer Support for Pro Tools
The Avid Media Composer family of video editing applications provides the following features 
to support interoperability with the Avid Pro Tools audio editing application.
Editing
NEW
•
Elastic Audio processing support in Pro Tools.
NEW
•
In Pro Tools, new disk cache settings let you load audio 
files into RAM for cached playback.
Feature
Refer to
Feature
Refer to
NEW
Common Nomenclature
To ease the workflows between the Avid audio and video 
editing applications, nomenclature changes have been made 
to certain tools and options in the Media Composer and Pro 
Tools applications.
“Unified Nomenclature for 
Audio and Video Editing” 
on page 22.
Basic Audio Assembly
Perform basic mixing using controls like Clip Gain, Volume 
Automation (“rubber banding”), Clip Pan, Pan Automation, 
Avid EQ, and AudioSuite Plug-ins. These can all be 
transferred to Pro Tools for further sweetening.
Working with Audio 
- Media Composer Help
Add markers to Media Composer tracks to indicate where 
the sound effects need to be added. Giving all the sound 
markers the same color makes them easy to filter for import 
in Pro Tools.
Suggested Uses for 
Markers  
- Media Composer Help

Co-Editing with Avid Audio and Video Editing Applications
44
Sound Effects
Avid Pro Tools Support for Media Composer
The Avid Pro Tools audio editing application provides the following features to support 
interoperability with the Avid Media Composer family of video editing applications.
Editing & Playback
Feature
Refer to
Audio Plug-ins
A core collection of audio plug-ins are installed with your 
Avid editing application. Avid also supports other 3rd-party 
RTAS and AudioSuite plug-ins.
If you are exchanging sequences/sessions where third-party 
effects have been applied, make sure that the receiving 
application also has these 3rd-party plug-ins installed.
Using Audio Plug-ins 
- Media Composer Help
Feature
Refer to
Video Playback 
Pro Tools can import and play back QuickTime HD 720p and 
1080i at all standard frame rates.
Alternatively, use Avid video I/O peripherals such as Mojo 
SDI to capture or playback SD video in the Pro Tools 
timeline. 
Pro Tools System 
Configurations 
- Avid Audio and Video 
Editing Workflow Guide
Basic Audio Assembly
Using Avid video peripherals, there are many video 
functions available to you in Pro Tools:
Working with Video in 
Pro Tools 
- Pro Tools Reference 
Guide
•
Locate markers that were imported with Media 
Composer tracks to indicate where the sound effects need 
to be added.
Import Options when 
Importing OMF or AAF 
Sequences 
- Pro Tools Reference 
Guide

Transferring Projects and Media between Audio and Video Editing Applications
45
Sound Effects
Transferring Projects and Media between Audio and 
Video Editing Applications
•
“Media Import/Export” on page 46
•
“AAF Support” on page 47
•
“OMF Support” on page 49
NEW
•
Trim AudioSuite effects with the clip handles.
Working with Video in 
Pro Tools 
- Pro Tools Reference 
Guide
•
Make use of the various timecode and synchronization 
features for working with audio, film, video, or digital 
video.
Time Code and 
Synchronization Features  
- Pro Tools Reference 
Guide
•
Keep the picture and audio editing in sync by using a 
guide audio track between Media Composer and Pro 
Tools.
Example Workflow: 
Working with a Guide 
Track 
- Pro Tools Reference 
Guide
Feature
Refer to
Feature
Refer to
NEW
Imported clip-based gain data can be edited alongside (and 
used in leiu of) the normal volume automation used in 
Pro Tools. Dynamic clip gain, or clip gain exceeding +12 dB 
is rendered on export to Media Composer.
Pro Tools Reference Guide

Transferring Projects and Media between Audio and Video Editing Applications
46
Media Import/Export
Feature
Further reference
Exchange of media between Media Composer and 
Pro Tools
Media Composer can interchange media as follows:
•
Media Composer can export AAF/OMF sequences with 
both video and audio tracks (containing embedded or 
linked audio media) for import by Pro Tools. Video 
media can also be linked.
•
Media Composer can export MXF audio and video files.
•
Media Composer can import MXF, WAV, or AIFF audio 
files exported by Pro Tools, into an Avid bin. 
Guidelines for Exporting 
OMFI and AAF Files 
- Media Composer Help 
Importing Media Files 
- Media Composer Help
Pro Tools can interchange media as follows:
•
Bounce to Disk and import the files into Media 
Composer
•
Export audio tracks with media to an AAF/OMF 
sequence . 
•
Export MXF, WAV, or AIFF audio files.
Importing and Exporting 
Session Data 
- Pro Tools Reference 
Guide

Transferring Projects and Media between Audio and Video Editing Applications
47
AAF Support
Export Media to Pro Tools 
The following options are available when exporting media to 
Pro Tools:
•
Create Export templates which transcode, copy, 
consolidate media.
•
Transcode media from Media Composer to various video 
formats during export.
•
Copy or consolidate media from Media Composer to any 
directory on shared or portable storage.
Each time the sequence is updated and exported again to 
the same directory, only new media files are exported, 
making updates much faster.
•
Mixdown layers of video media and effects to a single 
MXF file that can be played by Pro Tools systems that 
have a video peripheral attached.
Along with the media, export an AAF file of all the video 
metadata that includes the complex edit information (for 
example video clip names and scene markers) that can be 
displayed in Pro Tools.
•
Export high-definition QuickTime movies from Media 
Composer that are lightweight but retain good viewing 
quality for playback in Pro Tools.
Guidelines for Exporting 
OMFI and AAF Files 
- Media Composer Help
Feature
Further reference
Feature
Refer to
Media Composer support for AAF Sequences
Import and export AAF sequences with:
Importing Media Files 
- Media Composer Help
•
Linked and embedded audio files (MXF, WAV, or AIFF) 
and/or linked video files (MXF or OMF). The exported 
audio and media files must be placed on a storage where 
the video editing application can access them.
•
Mono and stereo audio tracks. 
NEW
•
Surround sound (5.1 and 7.1) audio tracks (with 
rendered/unrendered audio effects). 

Transferring Projects and Media between Audio and Video Editing Applications
48
NEW
•
Volume automation (up to +12 dB) via AAF.
Pro Tools support for AAF Sequences
Import and export AAF sequences with:
•
Linked and embedded audio files (MXF, WAV, or AIFF) 
and/or linked video files (MXF or OMF). The exported 
audio and media files must be placed on a storage where 
Pro Tools can access them.
•
Mono and stereo audio tracks.
Pro Tools Reference Guide
NEW
•
Multichannel (stereo, 5.1, or 7.1) audio tracks. These can 
also be exported as split mono audio files.
Pro Tools Reference Guide
NEW
•
Clip gain settings and automation (+12 dB).
Media Composer does not support dynamic clip gain, or 
clip gain exceeding +12 dB, therefore, these are rendered 
on export. 
Pro Tools Reference Guide
Import volume automation.
Pro Tools Reference Guide
NEW
Pro Tools now uses real-time fades, rather than rendered 
fades. On AAF export, all fades will be rendered for 
compatibility with Media Composer and other 3rd-party 
applications.
Pro Tools Reference Guide
Import markers that were added on Media Composer tracks 
to indicate where the sound effects need to be added. (These 
sound markers can be filtered by color during import, and are 
translated as "Memory Markers" in Pro Tools.)
Import Options when 
Importing OMF or AAF 
Sequences 
- Pro Tools Reference 
Guide
Import rendered audio effects from Media Composer.
Pro Tools Reference Guide
NEW
Automatically set the start time of the current Pro Tools 
session to match the start time of the AAF sequence that you 
are importing.
Importing and Exporting 
Session Data 
- Pro Tools Reference 
Guide
For high definition sequences, Pro Tools can import the 
audio tracks, and the Avid video track will appear as offline. 
(Pro Tools supports Avid HD video playback with Video 
Satellite using a linked Media Composer system.)
Video Satellite Guide
Feature
Refer to

Transferring Projects and Media between Audio and Video Editing Applications
49
OMF Support
Feature
Refer to
Exchange OMF Files between Media Composer and 
Pro Tools
•
Media Composer can export OMF sequences with both 
video and audio tracks (containing embedded or linked 
audio media) for import by Pro Tools. Video media can 
also be linked.
Guidelines for Exporting 
OMFI and AAF Files 
- Media Composer Help 
 
Interop guide
•
Pro Tools can export audio tracks to an OMF sequence 
for import by Media Composer. 
Media Composer support for OMF Sequences
Media Composer supports the following actions when 
working with OMF media and sequences:
•
Import and export of OMF sequences with embedded 
OMF video files and WAV or AIFF audio files.
•
Import and export of OMF sequences that refer to linked 
OMF video files and WAV or AIFF audio files.
•
OMF files only support mono audio tracks.
Import Settings: 
OMFI/AAF Tab 
- Media Composer Help
Pro Tools support for OMF Sequences
The following actions are supported when working with 
OMF media and sequences:
•
Export of OMF sequences with WAV or AIFF audio 
files.
•
Import and export of OMF sequences that refer to linked 
OMF video files and WAV or AIFF audio files.
•
OMF files only support mono audio tracks.
Importing and Exporting 
Session Data 
- Pro Tools Reference 
Guide
NEW
•
Automatically set the start time of the current Pro Tools 
session to match the start time of the OMF sequence that 
you are importing.
Importing and Exporting 
Session Data 
- Pro Tools Reference 
Guide
NEW
•
Export of real-time fades (rendered on export).


