News Release
September 1, 2026
Fujifilm Announces Availability of FUJINON UA94x8.7BESM 4K Broadcast Zoom Lens
A versatile, mid-range, cost-conscious solution optimized for operability and performance; initial orders expected to begin shipping in October 2026
VALHALLA, N.Y., September 1, 2026
– FUJIFILM North America Corporation, Optical Devices Division, announces the availability of FUJINON UA94x8.7BESM (“UA94x8.7”), a versatile box zoom lens for 2/3-inch sensor broadcast cameras designed for a wide variety of broadcast production applications. Initial orders of UA94x8.7 are expected to begin shipping to customers by mid-October 2026. The new lens will be showcased at IBC 2026 in Amsterdam, September 11-14.
FUJINON UA94x8.7 is positioned as a mid-range model between FUJINON UA70x8.7BESM ("UA70x8.7"), which is suitable for relatively compact venues, and FUJINON UA107x8.4BESM (“UA107x8.4”), which features a longer focal length. It covers a wide range of focal lengths in a single lens, offering versatility and ease of use for various production scenarios while keeping costs down.
“UA94x8.7 sits in a sweet spot for applications where operators don’t necessarily need the extreme telephoto ranges offered by the UA107x8.4 and UA125x8 box zooms,” said Stosh Durbacz, vice president, Sales, FUJIFILM North America Corporation, Optical Devices Division. “And operators will immediately notice the interface optimizations designed for the way we know they want to work – the optional servo focus control offers users ergonomics with a manual feel while being able to take advantage of the precision of digital focus, contributing to smooth operation in live production, at a price point we think will better align with their needs.”
UA94x8.7 covers the wide-angle to super-telephoto focal range from 8.7mm to 818mm, enabling operational flexibility and diverse visual creativity that makes it ideal for a wide variety of applications including sports broadcasts, concerts, and other large-scale live events. While FUJINON HD lenses cover similar focal lengths, UA94x8.7 delivers optical and electrical advancements resulting in high resolution, high contrast, and high dynamic range (HDR). It also features the latest image stabilization system and excellent control of zoom and focus operation.
Main features:
94x Zoom Range Covering the Wide-Angle 8.7mm to Ultra-Telephoto 818mm
Achieves a 94x zoom range covering a wide focal length range from 8.7mm wide-angle to 818mm ultra-telephoto.
High Optical Performance Supporting 4K Across the Entire Zoom Range
Utilizing Fujifilm’s proprietary optical simulation technology, various aberrations including those that degrade resolution and introduce color fringing are minimized, delivering high-quality image performance throughout the entire zoom range.
The adoption of the multi-layer coating technology HT-EBC (High Transmittance Electron Beam Coating) achieves high light transmittance (99.8%) and low reflectance (0.2%) over a wide wavelength range, enhancing color reproduction and suppressing flare.
These technologies realize the high resolution, high contrast and HDR unique to 4K lenses, allowing for rich gradation video production.
Packed with extensive support functions to enable comfortable filming
Equipped with an image stabilization system using Fujifilm’s proprietary "Ceramic Ball Roller System"
[1]
, enabling stable video production. From concerts with minimal movement to intense outdoor sports production, users can select from eight levels of stabilization depending on the subject’s movement and the production environment.
When combined with the Zoom Demand "ERD-50A," users can select from 200 types of zoom curves and toggle the image stabilization system on or off. Furthermore, pairing with the Focus Demand "EPD-51A" enables precise operator control of focus in all filming conditions.
Pricing And Availability
UA94x8.7 is due to be released in October 2026. It will be showcased at IBC 2026, to be held in Amsterdam, Netherlands, from September 11-14, 2026. For pricing information, contact your local sales representative at
www.fujinon.com/contact
.
For more information about UA94x8.7 and other FUJINON broadcast box lenses, visit
https://www.fujifilm.com/us/en/business/cine-and-broadcast/studio-field-lens/4k-studio-field-lens
.
[1]
The ceramic balls are ultra-precision processed to minimize friction resistance to the utmost, achieving high responsiveness and excellent durability during vibration reduction operation.
About Fujifilm
FUJIFILM North America Corporation, a marketing subsidiary of FUJIFILM Holdings America Corporation, consists of six operating divisions. The Imaging Division provides consumer and commercial photographic products and services, including silver halide consumables; inkjet consumables; digital printing equipment, along with service and support; personalized photo products fulfillment; film; one-time-use cameras; and the popular instax™ line of instant cameras, smartphone printers, instant film, and accessories. The Electronic Imaging Division markets its GFX System and X Series lines of mirrorless digital cameras, lenses, and accessories to provide a variety of content creation solutions for both still and moving imagery. The Optical Devices Division provides optical lenses for the broadcast, cinematography, closed circuit television, videography, and industrial markets, and also markets binoculars and other optical imaging solutions. The Business Innovation Division offers a full lineup of digital print and toner technologies focused on enabling the digital transformation of businesses and print shops with its offerings of multifunction printers, digital inkjet presses, production toner printers, software, and more. The Industrial Products Division delivers new products derived from Fujifilm technologies including data storage tape products, including OEM and FUJIFILM Ultrium LTO cartridges, desalination solutions, microfilters and gas separation