News Release
March 18, 2026
Fujifilm Announces Availability of FUJINON UA22x4.8BERD 4K Broadcast Zoom Lens
Lightweight versatility ideal for a wide variety of production situations; initial orders expected to begin shipping in April 2026
VALHALLA, N.Y.,
March 18, 2026
– FUJIFILM North America Corporation, Optical Devices Division, announces the availability of its new FUJINON UA22x4.8BERD (“UA22x4.8”), a broadcast zoom lens designed for lightweight versatility ideal for a wide variety of production situations. Initial orders of UA22x4.8 are expected to begin shipping to customers by the end of April 2026.
UA22x4.8 is a portable zoom lens for 2/3-inch sensor broadcast cameras, covering the wide to telephoto focal range from 4.8mm to 106mm with a compact (9.9 inches/251mm) and lightweight (4.8 lbs./2.17kg) design. This lens is a versatile solution that works well in many situations that require maximum mobility including news reporting, studio production, and live sports broadcasts that require operators to capture the excitement and immersion of events from their assigned positions.
“There is strong demand for versatile zoom lenses that can cover everything from wide angles to telephoto in professional filming environments such as news reporting, studio production, and sports broadcasting,” said Stosh Durbacz, vice president, Sales, FUJIFILM North America Corporation, Optical Devices Division. “In order to meet this demand, we released FUJINON UA18x5.5BERD (“UA18x5.5”) broadcast zoom lens in 2017, which has remained well received for its compact size, light weight, and versatile focal length coverage; UA22x4.8 continues this legacy."
UA22x4.8” inherits the desired features of UA18x5.5, including its compact, lightweight design, while expanding the focal range on both the wide and telephoto side, further enhancing functionality and expressive capability. Through improvements in lens processing technology and a design that balances durability and lightweight construction, Fujifilm has decreased weight and size compared to UA18x5.5, achieving a compact and lightweight body, reducing the burden of prolonged filming in the shoulder-mounted operation. Additionally, while UA18x5.5 offers a focal length range of 5.5mm to 100mm, the expanded wide-angle range of UA22x4.8 enables filming in narrow indoor spaces and capturing dynamic sports scenes with enhanced immersive quality.
Main features:
Excellent mobility, wide-angle coverage and high magnification
This 22x zoom lens covers a dynamic 4.8mm wide angle to 106mm telephoto range while remaining compact and lightweight. It can capture a wide range of scenes with a single lens, showcasing its versatility across various filming environments such as news reporting, studio production, and sports broadcasting. The wide-angle range has been expanded from the previous model, UA18x5.5, covering approximately three meters more, horizontally, at a distance of 10 meters from the subject, enabling successful coverage even in the most challenging spaces and environments.
4K optical performance across the entire zoom range
By utilizing the latest optical simulation technology and suppressing various types of aberrations, the lens achieves 4K optical performance across the entire zoom range. In addition, Fujifilm’s unique multi-layer coating HT-EBC (High Transmittance Electron Beam Coating) boasts high light transmittance and accurate color reproduction.
Equipped with features that support comfortable filming
Close-up capture is possible at a M.O.D. of 0.4m across the entire zoom range. Combined with the 4.8mm wide angle, this expands the range of filming in a variety of spaces. A 16-bit encoder capable of outputting high-resolution lens data, including zoom and focus positions, is a standard feature. It can be seamlessly integrated with various systems, including virtual studios that blend CG images with live footage.
Pricing And Availability
UA22x4.8 is available for order now at a manufacturer’s suggested retail price of $39,000 USD and is expected to begin shipping by the end of April 2026. It will be showcased at the 2026 NAB Show, the world’s largest international broadcast equipment trade show, to be held in Las Vegas from April 19 to 21, 2026. Also on display will be three new 4K broadcast lenses whose development was also announced today: UA16x4BERD, UA30x7.3BERD, and UA94x8.7BESM.
For more information about these lenses, visit
https://www.fujifilm.com/us/en/business/cine-and-broadcast/portable-lens/4k-portable-lens
.
About Fujifilm
FUJIFILM North America Corporation, a marketing subsidiary of FUJIFILM Holdings America Corporation, consists of six operating divisions. The Imaging Division provides consumer and commercial photographic products and services, including silver halide consumables; inkjet consumables; digital printing equipment, along with service and support; personalized photo products fulfillment; film; one-time-use cameras; and the popular instax™ line of instant cameras, smartphone printers, instant film, and accessories. The Electronic Imaging Division markets its GFX System and X Series lines of mirrorless digital cameras, lenses, and accessories to provide a variety of content creation solutions for both still and moving imagery. The Optical Devices Division provides optical lenses for the broadcast, cinematography, closed circuit television, videography, and industrial markets, and also markets binoculars and other optical imaging solutions. The Business Innovation Division offers a full lineup of digital print and toner technologies focused on enabling the digital transformation of businesses and print shops with its offerings of multifunction printers, digital inkjet presses, production toner printers, software, and more. The Industrial Products Division delivers new products derived from Fujifilm technologies including data storage tape products, including OEM and FUJIFILM Ultrium LTO cartridges, desalination solutions, microfilte