11
Video Speed Class:
The new capture protocol of SD 5.0
White Paper  |  February 2016
www.sdcard.org    |   ©2016 SD Association. All rights reserved

1
2
Conditions for publication
Publisher and Copyright Holder:
SD Card Association
2400 Camino Ramon, Suite 375
San Ramon, CA 94583 USA
Telephone: +1 (925) 275-6615
Fax: +1 (925) 886-4870
E-mail: help@sdcard.org
Disclaimers:
The information contained in this whitepaper is provided as is
without any representations or warranties of any kind. No
responsibility is assumed by the SD Association for any
damages, or any infringements of patents or other rights of
the SD Association or any third parties, which may result from
the use of any portion thereof. No license is granted by
implication, estoppel or otherwise under any patent or other
rights of the SD Association or any third-party. Nothing herein
shall be construed as an obligation by the SD Association to
disclose or distribute any technical information, know-how or
other confidential information to any third-party.
Trademarks Notice:
SD is a trademark or a registered trademark of SD-3C, LLC in
the United States, other countries or both. SD, SDHC,
miniSDHC, microSDHC, SDXC and microSDXC Logos are
trademarks of SD-3C, LLC.
Video Speed Class: The new capture protocol of SD 5.0 
www.sdcard.org    |   ©2016 SD Association. All rights reserved

1
1
3
Video Speed Class: The new capture protocol of SD 5.0 
www.sdcard.org    |   ©2016 SD Association. All rights reserved
Executive Summary
The SD Association (SDA) released the SD 5.0 specification to
answer evolving market needs with a Video Speed Class. The
SDA now positions the Video Speed Class as the preferred
speed class for a variety of new applications. 
Video Speed Class provides new capabilities for consumers
and a new enabling technology for the SD industry. 
From a consumer’s, and application developer’s, point of view,
SD 5.0 enables a new generation of applications that require
extended capture performance of up to 90 megabytes per
second (MB/s).
From an SD memory card maker’s point of view, SD 5.0
reimagines technical mechanisms to provide new SD
protocols that enable and optimize use of both the latest and
future NAND technology for all SD applications. 
From a marketing point of view, SD 5.0 marks an inflection
point where the SDA acknowledges that new applications like
video will require minimum speed capture and will continually
change their bandwidth requirements to achieve the best
display in any resolution. For every resolution, there are both
lower and higher quality image options for consumers. From
now on, applications or product manufacturers need to
simply report the bandwidth required to save the data, and
consumers will need to match or better this performance with
their SD memory card selection.

1
4
Consumer Overview
Video Speed Class joins and extends the existing SD
defined speed classes (see Figure 1). We use the phrase
speed class as a term that includes three specific protocols:
Video Speed Class, UHS Speed Class and Speed Class.
The speed class types include: Speed Class (C2, C4, C6 and
C10), UHS Speed Class (U1 and U3) and now Video Speed
Class (V6, V10, V30, V60 and V90). Video Speed Class
provides equivalents to existing speed classes and adds
new capture rates of 60 MB/s and 90 MB/s. 
The SDA provides a range of speed class options to
consumers so that they can cost-effectively meet the wide
array of application speed requirements set by a variety of
cameras, video cameras and other devices offering unique
features and capabilities. Each of these devices will
implement the necessary speed class into the device and,
to ensure solid performance, the device needs to be paired
with an SD memory card offering the same, or better,
capabilities.
Video Speed Class: The new capture protocol of SD 5.0 
www.sdcard.org    |   ©2016 SD Association. All rights reserved
Figure 1: Speed class support by SD interface and capture bandwidth
Video Speed Class for Consumers

1
5
Video Speed Class and Changing 
NAND Technology
Video Speed Class was designed to optimize use of modern
NAND technology. The earlier speed classes include fixed
parameters that are too specific to earlier NAND technology
and are difficult to design solutions with the newest NAND
technology. 
Each of the given speed class methods defines different card
access methods closely related to the underlying NAND
technology. The match, or mismatch, of each speed class
method to a specific NAND technology may lead to SD
memory cards that meet Video Speed Class requirements for a
given capture rate, yet not meet the requirements for the
equivalent Speed Class or UHS Speed Class. As an example, an
SD memory card may meet V30 requirements, by supporting
30 MB/s capture using the Video Speed Class protocol, yet
only meet C10 requirements, supporting 10 MB/s capture
with the Speed Class protocol. 
Video Speed Class Meets Changing 
Video Technology
Today’s advanced video capabilities vary greatly based on
the application. Variations in resolutions, video CODECs,
the amount of compression, the capture frame rate, and
possible simultaneous capture of additional information
(multiple streams, GPS, etc.) make earlier guidelines
difficult to use today. Figure 2 illustrates some of the
ranges of resolutions in popular formats, some of the
ranges of frame rates for each resolution, some of the
possible required recording rates, and some of the speed
classes that may be appropriate for any specific
combination of these factors. 
Resolution has increased so much it makes it difficult to
clearly include Standard Definition characteristics in the
same figure that includes 8K characteristics. While it may
not be in this figure, it is important to know that Video
Speed Class does support Standard Definition recording.
Video Speed Class: The new capture protocol of SD 5.0 
www.sdcard.org    |   ©2016 SD Association. All rights reserved
Figure 2: Resolutions, frame rates, and SD speed classes
If the application offers
multiple options, Video Speed
Class is the best choice for
future applications.
Despite the large number of
variables, one rule remains true:
match the SD memory card to
your specific application’s
requirements. The protocol
speed and type specified by
the application needs to be
matched. A guide to help
consumers select the right
memory card will be provided
in device owner’s manuals.

1
6
Why Is Video Speed Class the Future for the SD Ecosystem?
Video recording devices are expected to be among the first
application implementations for Video Speed Class.
However, video capture may not be the only applications
that use Video Speed Class. Consistent, fast writing speeds
with low wear characteristics are useful to all applications
that write to SD memory cards. Video Speed Class also
contains mechanisms to interleave writes to unrelated files,
enabling random write operations with appropriate OS
support. The SDA intends to support libraries to enable
such systems, but this will require more development time.
Video Speed Class: The new capture protocol of SD 5.0 
www.sdcard.org    |   ©2016 SD Association. All rights reserved
One of the basic attributes of the NAND chips used in SD
storage is that memory access is asymmetric in a couple
of ways: 
• An operation that writes data takes longer than an
operation that reads the same amount of data
• Relatively small writes (e.g., 4 KB) are easy, but re-writing
the same small write may require a much larger write
(e.g., 4 MB), which may take longer than expected to
complete
The Video Speed Class protocol provides a solution to this
re-writing characteristic and supports consistent write
performance that minimizes wear. This consistent
performance is a natural fit to the recording requirements
for video. Video Speed Class was designed to support
current and upcoming extensions of video resolution and
quality for 4K, 8K, 3D, HDR, 360 degree and high-speed
recording. 

1
7
How Does Video Speed Class Work?
In SD 5.0, SD memory cards supporting Video Speed Class
specify their own block size, using a combination of the
architecture of the internal NAND and the architecture of
the SD memory card’s use of those NAND chips to identify
logical data that may be physically erased without affecting
other data in the SD memory card. Hosts/applications use
this information to choose a logical address range of data
within the SD memory card that is to be erased. First, the
host ensures that any valid data in that address range is
moved elsewhere in the SD memory card. Then the
host/application commands the SD memory card to erase
the data in that address range. After this, the
host/application may write sequentially into this address
range at the maximum speed of the SD memory card
without any wasted write operations or write acceleration.
Current Address Saving
The block size specified by the SD memory card may be
very large, up to 512 MB. If the block is not fully used when
power is to be removed by the host, then the next address
to be written within the block needs to be remembered, so
that the partially filled block can be properly resumed when
power is re-applied by the current host or the next host.
SD 5.0 has commands to save this next address in the block
being written, and to resume the address to continue
sequential writing within the block after a power cycle.
Video Speed Class: The new capture protocol of SD 5.0 
www.sdcard.org    |   ©2016 SD Association. All rights reserved
There are three major features that combine to make Video
Speed Class special:
• SD memory card specified block size
• Current address saving
• Multi-file recording
SD Memory Card Specified Block Size
NAND storage chips feature large physical erase blocks that
physically hold data that can be erased in a single operation
to enable re-write of that media. The size for erase blocks is
typically measured in megabytes. With the introduction of
TLC NAND and 3D NAND, the size of an erase block may not
be a power of 2, as it was when Speed Class was invented
years ago. SD memory cards use one or more of these
physical blocks in one or more physical NAND chips at the
same time to meet a targeted performance level. 
The expression “one or more blocks” is a simplistic way to
describe the complicated ways that NAND chips are used in
today’s SD memory cards. How multiple NAND devices are
organized and accessed in parallel is the domain of SD
memory card manufacturers, the internal organization of
the NAND memory is the domain of NAND memory
manufacturers, and the application developers get to figure
out how to use the result efficiently. To support SD memory
card manufacturers, NAND chip manufacturers and
application developers, Video Speed Class contains a
defined set of 37 block sizes that range from 8 MB to 512
MB. These 37 block sizes are believed to be sufficient for the
foreseeable future, but if needed in the future, this
architecture could support more values.

1
8
Multi-File Recording
Modern video capture has evolved to require interleaving
the write operations of multiple files. General use by mobile
or laptop storage has similar needs as described earlier in
“Why Is Video Speed Class the Future for the SD
Ecosystem?”
The following are examples of video functionality that may
require interleaving multiple files while writing:
• Saving independent video streams, as recently
introduced by new 360 degree cameras for virtual
reality videos and drones
• Video capture modes that simultaneously capture 
high-quality still pictures
• High-quality still pictures that display time-lapse capture 
• Saving a trail of GPS coordinates during video capture
• Saving stereoscopic video (3D)
• Saving independent video streams 
(broadcast video capture)
• Saving both raw and jpg still images
• Random file writing while recording 
(computer use model)
In SD technology, a difficult part of interleaving such write
operations is keeping up with the directory information in
the file system tables. SD technology has the capability of
accelerating a single directory area, but only in all earlier
speed class implementations. In Video Speed Class, this
support was increased to support the simultaneous
interleaving of eight different files. Support was also added
to allow the closure of one update directory and the
opening of another.
Video Speed Class: The new capture protocol of SD 5.0 
www.sdcard.org    |   ©2016 SD Association. All rights reserved

1
9
Conclusion
When available, Video Speed Class is the preferred access method for SD
technology. Video Speed Class will: 
• Provide much faster recording for the exotic video technology of the future
• Enable the use of future NAND technology in SD memory cards
• Support the new standard protocol for hosts/applications to write efficiently
to SD memory cards
The most important advice to consumers and users of all types is to continue
matching the SD memory card to an application’s recommended speed class to
continue enjoying the best recording and playback possible.
Video Speed Class: The new capture protocol of SD 5.0 
www.sdcard.org    |   ©2016 SD Association. All rights reserved
