New in Media Composer v2022.10
1
What’s New for
Avid
® Media Composer
® v2022.10
New in Media Composer v2022.10
The following are new for Media Composer v2022.10:
•
Working with Proxy Media in an Avid NEXIS | EDGE Environment
•
Media Cache Dialog Update
•
Multiplex I/O Support for Multiple Open I/O Plug-ins
•
New Relink Menu and Linked Media Dialog
•
New Sequence Templates and User Setting
•
“Choose For Me” Options Added for New Projects
•
Keyboard Shortcuts to Switch Focus Between Windows and Tabs
•
Bin Metadata Tooltips
•
FreeType Font Support for Titler+
•
Support for Two or More Ganged Groups in the Audio Mixer
Working with Proxy Media in an Avid NEXIS | EDGE 
Environment
Creating proxy clips and linking them to existing master clips is easy in Media Composer | Enterprise 
(even without NEXIS | EDGE), and especially useful when working remotely. With a single click, 
you can toggle playback between high-resolution and proxy media, adapting to your performance 
requirements.
Proxy media can be created by accessing the Avid NEXIS | EDGE server through a web browser or 
from within Media Composer. You can also create and playback proxies in a standalone Media 
Composer. For details on a remote proxy workflow, see the section labeled Remote Proxy Workflow. 
For details on creating and playing back proxy media in a standalone Media Composer, refer to 
Creating and Playing Proxy Media in a Standalone Media Composer.
Remote Proxy Workflow
In order to use Avid NEXIS | EDGE with media on a remote NEXIS server, proxies must be created 
using an on-premises Media Composer system or via Distributed Processing, which is accessed 
remotely. Accomplishing these steps requires a few, different products. Before using a remote proxy 
workflow, make sure to review the following prerequisites:
Product
Version
Installed Where?
Refer to
Avid NEXIS | EDGE 
v2022.10
At the facility
Avid NEXIS | EDGE Installation 
Guide

Working with Proxy Media in an Avid NEXIS | EDGE Environment
2
Improving Network Performance of Avid NEXIS | EDGE
Many factors can affect performance of a remote editing system like Avid NEXIS | EDGE. In 
particular, the bandwidth and latency of your networked environment is essential to a satisfactory 
editing experience. As latency increases and bandwidth (throughput) decreases, the more time it will 
take to load clips from the NEXIS server, if they aren’t already cached locally. Latency of 50ms or 
less, and bandwidth of at least 3 MB/s or higher, is recommended. You can measure both from the 
Avid NEXIS Client Manager. At higher latency, you may notice that projects and bins take longer to 
open, and functions like start of play and copying media take longer as well.
Users of Avid NEXIS | EDGE may want to consider the following guidelines to get the best 
performance out of their remote system:
•
Avoid Wi-Fi whenever possible, and use a wired, Ethernet connection instead
•
Use only the VPN software recommended by Avid
•
Do not download or upload large files while editing
•
Make sure automatic updates are scheduled for times outside of working hours
•
Turn off syncing for cloud apps, such as Dropbox, Google Drive, and One Drive, or set them to 
use minimal bandwidth
•
Avoid simultaneous use of streaming apps (Netflix, Zoom, etc.) and P2P software by anyone on 
your network
n If your latency is greater than 50ms, you may want to consider copying your media locally.
Connecting to Avid NEXIS | EDGE from a Remote System
Once you’ve installed the necessary components for a NEXIS | EDGE proxy workflow, and 
optimized your network for lowest latency and maximum bandwidth, it’s time to get connected to 
Avid NEXIS | EDGE from your remote system.
Avid NEXIS Client 
v22.5 or higher 
At the facility and on your 
remote system
Avid NEXIS Client Manager 
Installation and User’s Guide
Media Composer 
must be LICENSED as 
“Media Composer | 
Enterprise”
v2022.10
On your remote system
Media Composer Install Guide
Distributed Processing 
v2022.10
This is configuration 
dependent.  
The main part of DP gets 
installed with Avid NEXIS | 
EDGE. There is a separate 
DP installer that needs to be 
installed on a system that 
will be the “worker” system.
Media Composer Distributed 
Processing Admin Guide.
VPN software (not 
provided by Avid) 
On your remote system
Product
Version
Installed Where?
Refer to

Working with Proxy Media in an Avid NEXIS | EDGE Environment
3
To get connected:
1. Connect to your facility’s VPN.
2. Open the Avid NEXIS Client Manager.
3. Mount your workspaces.
4. Click the General Preference Settings button to open the General Preferences window.
5. In the Client Type pulldown menu, select Remote Avid NEXIS.
6. Start Media Composer | Enterprise.
7. In the Media Composer “Select Project” window, enter the login credentials for the Avid NEXIS 
| EDGE server (NEXIS system name or IP address) and enable “Remote Avid NEXIS”.

Working with Proxy Media in an Avid NEXIS | EDGE Environment
4
-
A green NEXIS | EDGE indicates the connection is successful.
-
A yellow NEXIS | EDGE indicates an attempt to connect.
-
An orange NEXIS | EDGE indicates a successful connection, but the seat quota (number of 
purchased Media Composer | Enterprise licenses) has been exceeded.
-
A red NEXIS | EDGE indicates the connection failed.
8. Select your project.
Any shared project on the NEXIS server will be accessible to remote Media Composer clients.
9. Click Open.
n In order to avoid problems with indexing, make sure to set your search directory to local when you 
create a project with “Remote Avid NEXIS” enabled, even if the Media Composer project is based on 
an Avid NEXIS workspace. If you opened an already existing project, verify that your search data 
directory is on your local system. Open the Media Composer project, bring up the Find window 
(Ctrl+F [Windows], Cmd+F [macOS]) and select the Settings icon on the bottom left of the window. 
Make sure the directory is set to Local.
Creating Proxy Media
Media Composer | Enterprise allows you to create proxy media for one or more assets in a bin. The 
creation of proxies can be accomplished from within Media Composer or by using a web browser.
n Audio with a sample rate of 48048 Hz (48.048 kHz), such as audio produced through a pull down 
process, is not supported. All audio used in the proxy creation process must be online to avoid 
creating damaged proxy files that cannot be easily deleted.
To create proxy media in Media Composer:
1. Select master clips, subclips, groups or sequences in your bin. 
2. Open the Create Proxies window by doing one of the following:
t
Right-click on the asset(s) and select Create Proxies.
t
Select Create Proxies from the Bin Fast Menu.
The Create Proxies window appears.
3. Select a local drive or choose an Avid NEXIS workspace to host assets and temporary files for 
the job.
4. (Optional) Select the Distributed Processing option and click OK.
You can monitor the job progress through the Distributed Process Job Status app.
n The Distributed Processing option is only available after you select an Avid NEXIS workspace.
5. Click OK. 
The proxy media appears in the bin with an orange clip icon.
To create proxies through a browser:
1. Connect to the Avid NEXIS | EDGE server through a supported web browser.
2. Navigate to the location of the assets for which you want to create proxy media.
3. Right click on the asset, bin, or project and select Create Proxies from the context menu.
The app displays the Create Proxies confirmation window.

Working with Proxy Media in an Avid NEXIS | EDGE Environment
5
n The ability to generate proxies per workspace has been disabled for this release. Users can generate 
proxies at the Project level.
n If you have a project or workspace with a large number of assets, Avid recommends that you create 
proxies during off-peak hours, since these operations may take a long time to process.
4. Click the Create button in the confirmation window to continue, or click Cancel to exit the proxy 
creation process.
If you click Create, the app displays another window with information about the number of 
assets for which proxies will be created. If proxy media is already available for some assets, 
these assets will be skipped — new or duplicate media will not be created. 
5. Click Close to exit the window.
6. (Optional) Check the status of your job in the Distributed Processing Status window. 
If you create proxies at the project level or higher, Distributed Processing creates one job per 
Media Composer bin. Depending on the number of bins, this could result in a large number of 
new jobs. If you need to cancel the entire job, you must cancel each sub-job (one per bin) 
individually.
Working with Proxy Media in a Bin
Proxy media is displayed in a bin with an orange clip icon. This allows you to quickly identify any 
clips with proxies. If proxies have been deleted, icons will no longer be shown as orange.

Working with Proxy Media in an Avid NEXIS | EDGE Environment
6
Four additional columns have been added to display information about proxies, including Proxy 
Offline status, Proxy Video format, Proxy Audio format, and Proxy Path.
•
Proxy Offline shows any video or audio media that is offline for a clip. This is similar to the 
original Offline column.
•
Proxy Video shows the resolution of the available proxy. This column will update depending on 
the options selected in the Timeline Video Quality menu. When the Timeline Video Quality is set 
to Full Quality (8-bit or greater), an associated proxy will display using the H.264 format. If 
Draft Quality or Best Performance is selected, the DNxHD LB format will be used.
•
Proxy Audio shows AAC if there is audio associated with the proxy.
•
Proxy Path shows the location where the proxy media resides.
n In the 2022.10 version of Media Composer, automatic refresh of bin lock status has been disabled for 
shared projects in an Avid NEXIS | EDGE proxy environment. By default, for a locked bin, the bin 
lock icon color will appear red until you do a manual refresh, by right-clicking in the Bin Container 
sidebar or using the Fast Menu and choosing the "Refresh" command, or a forced auto save 
occurs, which updates the bin status and changes the icon color to yellow if the bin has been 
modified. You may avoid constant, manual refreshing by adjusting your Bin Settings to “Force AutoSave” at more frequent intervals.
Playing Proxy Media in a Remote Media Composer
Once a clip has proxy media associated with it, you can begin playback and editing of the proxy 
media. The first time a clip or sequence is played you may notice a delay while the proxies are 
cached. Subsequent plays should not exhibit the same delay.
To playback proxy media:
1. Right-click the Play button and select Proxy Preferred.
The play button changes to orange, indicating you are in Proxy mode.
-
When “High-Resolution Only” is selected, high-resolution, local media is played.
-
When “Proxy Preferred” is selected, proxy is the preferred playback format. If the proxy is 
offline or not available but the high-resolution, local media is, then the high-resolution 
media will be played.

Working with Proxy Media in an Avid NEXIS | EDGE Environment
7
-
When “High-Resolution Preferred” is selected, high-resolution, local media is the preferred 
playback format. However, if the high-resolution media is offline or not available but the 
proxy is, then the proxy will be played.
2. Play the proxy media of your choice.
3. Adjust the Timeline Video Quality playback (Full Quality vs. Draft).
Working with Proxy Media in a Sequence
When working remotely with proxy media, latency and bandwidth are important considerations, 
along with the complexity and density of a sequence. In most cases, setting the Timeline Video 
Quality to Full Quality (8-bit or greater) is recommended, when playing back media from a remote 
NEXIS server. With Full Quality selected, the proxy being called is optimized for efficiency over the 
network, while also providing a high quality image. However, if you experience poor performance 
while playing back portions of your sequence, particularly those sections with many edits or a high 
number of streams, you may want to set the Timeline Video Quality to “Draft Quality” or “Better 
Performance”. This will call for a proxy that provides better performance, once it is cached, but 
reduced image quality.
Using Copy Media 
Copy Media is a feature that allows you to select items within a bin and gather all the related media 
across mounted storage and collect them onto a single target drive. This makes it easy to migrate 
project content from one system to another. In addition to selecting items in a bin, you can also select 
bins and folders within the Bin Container Sidebar. Selecting a folder is the same as selecting all items 
in the folder. 
n You must be connected to Avid NEXIS | EDGE and have a Media Composer | Enterprise license to 
use Copy Media.
n Copy Media copies managed media. It will not copy Linked media.
To copy media:
1. Select the items in the bin you want to copy or select the desired bin(s) in the Bin Container 
Sidebar. 
n If you select a sequence to copy, the Copy Media workflow copies the entire media file of the 
original master clip. 
n If you select bins that are closed, they will be opened at the time the copy function begins.
2. Right-click and select Copy Media.
The Copy Media dialog opens.

Working with Proxy Media in an Avid NEXIS | EDGE Environment
8
n As soon as the Copy Media window opens, size calculation begins based on the enabled checkboxes. 
Enabling or disabling checkboxes changes the calculation and updates the total.
Available space for the selected directory is displayed to inform you if there is enough space to 
perform the operation. If there is not enough space, copying will not be allowed.
3. Choose the items you want included with the copy: Bins, Managed media, Proxy media, and 
Renders. 
4. Choose whether to copy the media to a Drive or Folder.

Working with Proxy Media in an Avid NEXIS | EDGE Environment
9
5. If you select Folder, click “Set” to set a path to the folder where you want the items copied. 
6. If you selected Bins to be copied, the “Copy Bins to” option is available. Click the “Set” button 
to set the location where the Bin is copied. If Folder was selected, you can choose to Copy Bins 
to the same location as the folder. 
7. Click OK. The applicable items are copied to the appropriate location.
Note the following:
-
If you selected a root folder where an Avid MediaFiles folder already exists, the managed 
media and proxy media are placed into the respective MXF folders. Managed media is 
placed into a new folder within MXF and the folder is named using the next available 
number.
-
If no Avid MediaFiles folder or MXF folder exists at the selected location, an Avid 
MediaFiles folder is created and the media is placed inside the MXF “1” folder. Proxy media 
is placed in the Proxy folder based on the next available number. If no Proxy folder is 
available, a new Proxy folder is created and the media is copied to the “1” folder.
-
If you selected a specific folder to copy the media to, the media appears in an “Avid Copied 
Media” folder at the target location. 
-
If you chose to copy bins, the bins are placed in an “Avid Copied Bins” folder at the target 
location.
n When performing Copy Media of a Multicam Group Clip, or a sequence that contains Multicam 
Group clips, all of the sources for Group clips are copied. If you only want to copy the current 
camera, flatten the Multicam sequence.
Creating and Playing Proxy Media in a Standalone Media Composer
You do not need to be a remote user to work with proxy media. A standalone Media Composer | 
Enterprise can create and playback proxy media.
To create proxy media in Media Composer:
1. Select the master clips, subclips, groups or sequences in your bin. 
2. Open the Create Proxies window by doing one of the following:
t
Right-click on the asset(s) and select Create Proxies.
t
Select Create Proxies from the Bin Fast menu.
The Create Proxies window appears.
3. Select either a local drive or choose an Avid NEXIS workspace if your standalone editor is on 
premises with an Avid NEXIS Server.
4. Click OK. 
The proxy media appears in the bin with an orange clip icon.

Media Cache Dialog Update
10
To playback proxy media:
1. Right-click the Play button and select Proxy Preferred.
-
When “High-Resolution Only” is selected, high-resolution, local media is played.
-
When “Proxy Preferred” is selected, proxy is the preferred playback format. If the proxy is 
offline or not available but the high-resolution, local media is, then the high-resolution 
media will be played.
-
When “High-Resolution Preferred” is selected, high-resolution, local media is the preferred 
playback format. However, if the high-resolution media is offline or not available but the 
proxy is, then the proxy will be played.
The play button changes to orange indicating you are in Proxy mode.
2. Play the proxy media of your choice.
Media Cache Dialog Update
New options have been added to the File Cache tab, located under Media Cache settings (Media 
Composer > Preferences > Site > Media Cache > File Cache), which are useful for remote proxy 
workflows with Avid NEXIS | EDGE. Options in the File Cache tab now include “Enable Disk 
Cache”, “Maximum Disk Cache Usage” and the ability to "Flush Disk”, which will remove all data 
and contents of the selected directory.
n These features are only relevant to users of Avid NEXIS | EDGE.
n Avid NEXIS | EDGE users should always select “Enable Disk Cache”.

Multiplex I/O Support for Multiple Open I/O Plug-ins
11
File Disk Cache (for proxy media only) stores individual frames of proxy media played from the 
Avid NEXIS server. This allows the remote client to avoid pulling the same media over a network 
connection more than once, and improves playback and editing performance. The directory for File 
Disk Cache is already selected by default in the Media Cache dialog, and can be found here:
•
(macOS) /Users/Shared/AvidCache
•
(Windows) C:\Users\Public\Documents\Avid Media Composer\AvidMediaFilesLocalCache
Another cache that helps with network variability is Bin Cache. Project and bin files are stored 
locally for remote clients and (over time) can add up. Bin Cache stores the files indefinitely, but users 
can delete the files to clear space, and they will be re-cached the next time a project and bin are 
opened. Only bins opened on the remote client, and not a complete copy of the entire shared project, 
are stored. Bin Cache is stored in the following locations:
•
(macOS) /Users/Shared/AvidMediaComposer/Avid Remote
•
(Windows) C:\Users\Public\Documents\Avid Media Composer\Avid Remote
Multiplex I/O Support for Multiple Open I/O Plug-ins
With this release, you can use multiple active Open I/O plug-ins at the same time. If your system has 
more than one I/O hardware device attached, you can use them simultaneously as well. This feature 
is accessed through the HW/SW button (“Toggle Hardware”), located in the Timeline window.
n The context menu on the HW/SW button has changed to reflect the ability to select multiple hardware 
devices.

Multiplex I/O Support for Multiple Open I/O Plug-ins
12
Right-click or Control-click on the HW/SW button to select or deselect hardware interfaces and 
streaming plug-ins independently. You can turn on as many items as necessary when editing and have 
hardware and software devices active concurrently. Left-click on the button to activate or deactivate 
your selections.
n Streaming plug-ins are always deselected when you start Media Composer, even if you had selected 
them when you quit.
Control panels for each hardware interface or streaming plug-in can be accessed individually from 
the context menu by choosing “Configure”, which opens the Avid I/O Manager. If the control panel 
for a particular device must be accessed from outside of the context menu on the HW/SW button, it 
will call up control panels for those attached interfaces and streaming plug-ins.
n In some instances, multiple, active Open I/O and streaming plug-ins may not stay in sync. This is due 
to the diverse nature of the various plug-ins, which may prevent perfect synchronization.
Users familiar with the HW/SW button from previous versions of Media Composer may notice that 
the button has been updated to reflect its current state. These states include corresponding icons for 
Inactive, SW Selected, HW Selected, Both Selected, SW Active (flashing), HW Active, and Both 
Active (SW flashing).
Known restrictions:
•
When activating the Digital Cut Tool or the Capture Tool, only one hardware interface can be 
active. If more than one hardware interface is active, you will be asked to select which one to 
remain active and the other(s) will be automatically deselected.
•
Using more than one hardware device from the same manufacturer is not currently permitted. 
For example, you can use one AJA and one BMD device, but not two BMD devices or two AJA 
devices.

New Relink Menu and Linked Media Dialog
13
•
“Use Local Audio” is available only when no physical hardware interfaces are active. You can 
use local audio if the only active interfaces are streaming plug-ins.
•
This feature DOES NOT add the ability to use host audio simultaneously with external hardware. 
•
Capturing while streaming is not currently supported. 
New Relink Menu and Linked Media Dialog
In the latest version of Media Composer, the old Relink menu has been replaced to simplify the 
relinking workflow and improve performance. Relinking is an important function when clips and 
sequences lose their connection to previously linked media files. For example, relinking might be 
necessary when consolidating or moving media between systems, which changes the original path to 
files on a hard drive.
The Relink menu now includes two options:
•
Managed Media, opens the old Relink dialog
•
Linked Media, opens the new Linked Media dialog
The new Relink menu can be launched with or without an item selected in a bin. It can also be 
launched from the Bin Container sidebar menu with multiple bins selected. Simply right-click on a 
bin or selected clips, and choose Relink > Linked Media to launch the new Linked Media dialog.
In the Linked Media dialog, unlinked clips are shown in red and the highlight color for any selected 
clips is white. You may select specific clips to relink or proceed directly to locating media without a 
selection.

New Relink Menu and Linked Media Dialog
14
The dropdown menu in the upper-left corner of the Linked Media dialog filters what is shown. 
Choosing “Offline only” or “All media” will present metadata for those selected clips. Similarly, the 
search field in the upper-right corner filters by keywords.
When you are ready to relink, click the “Locate Media” button, navigate to the folder where your 
media resides, and click “Open”. Media Composer will look for the original media within the 
directory and reestablish the broken file paths.

New Sequence Templates and User Setting
15
New Sequence Templates and User Setting
Whenever a new sequence is created, a sequence template will be used to configure the number and 
type of tracks, custom track names, and starting Timecode. Users of Media Composer should find 
that this speeds up the process of creating sequences, as compared with earlier versions. Other 
changes include new User Settings for “Sequence Template” and a new submenu when creating a 
new sequence (Timeline > New > Sequence), with options for the new Sequence Template or the 
Default Template.
n The old Timeline setting section for the set up of default tracks has been removed.
n Default Starting TC has been removed from General Settings and must now be configured in the 
Sequence Template.

“Choose For Me” Options Added for New Projects
16
Right-clicking in the Timeline and choosing “Create Sequence Template” from the context menu 
opens a “Create new setting” dialog box, which creates a new template based on the current sequence 
settings.
“Choose For Me” Options Added for New Projects
New users of Media Composer can get started more quickly with the “Choose For Me” check box in 
the “New Project” tab of the “Select Project” window.

“Choose For Me” Options Added for New Projects
17
When this check box is selected, the project will not have a final Raster or Edit Rate set by default. 
Instead, when you add your first clip to the Timeline, Media Composer will prompt you with a 
“Project Properties” window and will automatically select settings that match your clip. You may 
proceed with these settings or change them using the “Raster” and “Edit Rate” dropdown menus.
Two default bins are also added to your project and a new sequence is created. The green bin 
(representing the source side) is intended for clips, and the blue bin (representing the record side) is 
for storing your sequences.

“Choose For Me” Options Added for New Projects
18
Users who select the “Choose for Me” option when setting up a new project will notice another, 
helpful addition in the latest version of Media Composer. Whenever a bin or the Timeline are empty, 
the background of these windows now includes a "passive hint", or directions for what users should 
do next. Bin windows contain a passive hint to "Drag from Source Browser to add clips to Project" 
and the Timeline instructs users to "Drag clips here to start editing".

Keyboard Shortcuts to Switch Focus Between Windows and Tabs
19
Keyboard Shortcuts to Switch Focus Between 
Windows and Tabs
New keyboard shortcuts allow you to cycle through open windows and tabs in the Media Composer 
interface (for example, switching between Bin tabs). Open windows, whether floating or tabbed, and 
anything with a vertical title bar can be quickly selected by using these keystrokes. The direction of 
cycling can be modified with additional keystrokes (by default, “focus” moves left to right, or based 
on the geometry of the window layout).
•
Ctrl + Up or Down arrow (Windows) / Cmd + Up or Down arrow (macOS), switches between 
windows.
•
Ctrl + Tab (Windows) / Ctrl + Tab (macOS), switches between tabs.
Bin Metadata Tooltips
Viewing information without leaving your preferred view saves time while editing. You can now 
quickly access basic metadata in a tooltip when hovering over a thumbnail or label in the Bin’s Frame 
View. Metadata in the tooltip includes Duration, Format, and Creation Date.
FreeType Font Support for Titler+
Titler+ has gained support for FreeType fonts, greatly expanding the variety of fonts available for use 
in a project's titles, including popular formats such as OpenType fonts.
Support for Two or More Ganged Groups in the Audio 
Mixer
Ganging groups in the Audio Mixer allows you to sync the sliders for multiple audio clips and adjust 
their levels or panning simultaneously. This feature supports up to ten ganged groups.

Support for Two or More Ganged Groups in the Audio Mixer
20
You can access the Gang menu by right-clicking on the Gang icon in the Audio Mixer.
Select one of the ten possible Gang groups, A through J.
In addition to its color, hovering over the Gang icon indicates the associated Gang group in a Tooltip.
You can apply multiple gangs by using the Grouping tool found in the Audio Mixer sidebar. Rightclick on the group, select Ganging, and choose to Move or Add a Gang.

Support for Two or More Ganged Groups in the Audio Mixer
21
Legal Notices
Product specifications are subject to change without notice and do not represent a commitment on the part of Avid Technology, Inc.
This product is subject to the terms and conditions of a software license agreement provided with the software. The product may only be 
used in accordance with the license agreement.
This product may be protected by one or more U.S. and non-U.S patents. Details are available at www.avid.com/patents.
This document is protected under copyright law. An authorized licensee of Avid Media Composer may reproduce this publication for the 
licensee’s own use in learning how to use the software. This document may not be reproduced or distributed, in whole or in part, for 
commercial purposes, such as selling copies of this document or providing support or educational services to others. This document is 
supplied as a guide for Avid Media Composer. Reasonable care has been taken in preparing the information it contains. However, this 
document may contain omissions, technical inaccuracies, or typographical errors. Avid Technology, Inc. does not accept responsibility of 
any kind for customers’ losses due to the use of this document. Product specifications are subject to change without notice.
Copyright © 2022 Avid Technology, Inc. and its licensors. All rights reserved.
The following disclaimer is required by Apple Computer, Inc.:
APPLE COMPUTER, INC. MAKES NO WARRANTIES WHATSOEVER, EITHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, REGARDING THIS 
PRODUCT, INCLUDING WARRANTIES WITH RESPECT TO ITS MERCHANTABILITY OR ITS FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR 
PURPOSE. THE EXCLUSION OF IMPLIED WARRANTIES IS NOT PERMITTED BY SOME STATES. THE ABOVE EXCLUSION MAY 
NOT APPLY TO YOU. THIS WARRANTY PROVIDES YOU WITH SPECIFIC LEGAL RIGHTS. THERE MAY BE OTHER RIGHTS THAT 
YOU MAY HAVE WHICH VARY FROM STATE TO STATE.
The following disclaimer is required by Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics, Inc. for the use of their TIFF library:
Copyright © 1988–1997 Sam Leffler 
Copyright © 1991–1997 Silicon Graphics, Inc.
Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software [i.e., the TIFF library] and its documentation for any purpose is hereby 
granted without fee, provided that (i) the above copyright notices and this permission notice appear in all copies of the software and 
related documentation, and (ii) the names of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics may not be used in any advertising or publicity relating to 
the software without the specific, prior written permission of Sam Leffler and Silicon Graphics.
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED “AS-IS” AND WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR OTHERWISE, 
INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
IN NO EVENT SHALL SAM LEFFLER OR SILICON GRAPHICS BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT OR 
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND, OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR 
PROFITS, WHETHER OR NOT ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF DAMAGE, AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, ARISING OUT 
OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
The following disclaimer is required by the Independent JPEG Group:
This software is based in part on the work of the Independent JPEG Group.
This Software may contain components licensed under the following conditions:
Copyright (c) 1989 The Regents of the University of California. All rights reserved. 
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are 
duplicated in all such forms and that any documentation, advertising materials, and other materials related to such distribution and use 
acknowledge that the software was developed by the University of California, Berkeley. The name of the University may not be used to 
endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission. THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS 
IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES 
OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
Copyright (C) 1989, 1991 by Jef Poskanzer. 
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, 
provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in 
supporting documentation. This software is provided "as is" without express or implied warranty. 
Copyright 1995, Trinity College Computing Center. Written by David Chappell. 
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, 
provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in 
supporting documentation. This software is provided "as is" without express or implied warranty. 
Copyright 1996 Daniel Dardailler. 
Permission to use, copy, modify, distribute, and sell this software for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, provided that the above 
copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation, 
and that the name of Daniel Dardailler not be used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, 
written prior permission. Daniel Dardailler makes no representations about the suitability of this software for any purpose. It is provided "as 
is" without express or implied warranty. 
Modifications Copyright 1999 Matt Koss, under the same license as above. 
Copyright (c) 1991 by AT&T. 

Support for Two or More Ganged Groups in the Audio Mixer
22
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any purpose without fee is hereby granted, provided that this entire notice 
is included in all copies of any software which is or includes a copy or modification of this software and in all copies of the supporting 
documentation for such software. 
THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTY. IN PARTICULAR, NEITHER 
THE AUTHOR NOR AT&T MAKES ANY REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE MERCHANTABILITY 
OF THIS SOFTWARE OR ITS FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
This product includes software developed by the University of California, Berkeley and its contributors.
The following disclaimer is required by Paradigm Matrix:
Portions of this software licensed from Paradigm Matrix.
The following disclaimer is required by Ray Sauers Associates, Inc.:
“Install-It” is licensed from Ray Sauers Associates, Inc. End-User is prohibited from taking any action to derive a source code equivalent of 
“Install-It,” including by reverse assembly or reverse compilation, Ray Sauers Associates, Inc. shall in no event be liable for any damages 
resulting from reseller’s failure to perform reseller’s obligation; or any damages arising from use or operation of reseller’s products or the 
software; or any other damages, including but not limited to, incidental, direct, indirect, special or consequential Damages including lost 
profits, or damages resulting from loss of use or inability to use reseller’s products or the software for any reason including copyright or 
patent infringement, or lost data, even if Ray Sauers Associates has been advised, knew or should have known of the possibility of such 
damages.
The following disclaimer is required by Videomedia, Inc.:
“Videomedia, Inc. makes no warranties whatsoever, either express or implied, regarding this product, including warranties with respect to 
its merchantability or its fitness for any particular purpose.”
“This software contains V-LAN ver. 3.0 Command Protocols which communicate with V-LAN ver. 3.0 products developed by Videomedia, 
Inc. and V-LAN ver. 3.0 compatible products developed by third parties under license from Videomedia, Inc. Use of this software will allow 
“frame accurate” editing control of applicable videotape recorder decks, videodisc recorders/players and the like.” 
The following disclaimer is required by Altura Software, Inc. for the use of its Mac2Win software and Sample Source 
Code:
©1993–1998 Altura Software, Inc.
The following disclaimer is required by Ultimatte Corporation:
Certain real-time compositing capabilities are provided under a license of such technology from Ultimatte Corporation and are subject to 
copyright protection.
The following disclaimer is required by 3Prong.com Inc.:
Certain waveform and vector monitoring capabilities are provided under a license from 3Prong.com Inc.
The following disclaimer is required by Interplay Entertainment Corp.:
The “Interplay” name is used with the permission of Interplay Entertainment Corp., which bears no responsibility for Avid products.
This product includes portions of the Alloy Look & Feel software from Incors GmbH.
This product includes software developed by the Apache Software Foundation (http://www.apache.org/).
© DevelopMentor
This product may include the JCifs library, for which the following notice applies:
JCifs © Copyright 2004, The JCIFS Project, is licensed under LGPL (http://jcifs.samba.org/). See the LGPL.txt file in the Third Party 
Software directory on the installation CD.
Avid Interplay contains components licensed from LavanTech. These components may only be used as part of and in connection with Avid 
Interplay.
Attn. Government User(s). Restricted Rights Legend
U.S. GOVERNMENT RESTRICTED RIGHTS. This Software and its documentation are “commercial computer software” or “commercial 
computer software documentation.” In the event that such Software or documentation is acquired by or on behalf of a unit or agency of the 
U.S. Government, all rights with respect to this Software and documentation are subject to the terms of the License Agreement, pursuant 
to FAR §12.212(a) and/or DFARS §227.7202-1(a), as applicable.
Trademarks
Avid, the Avid Logo, Avid Everywhere, Avid DNXHD, Avid DNXHR, Avid NEXIS, AirSpeed, Eleven, EUCON, Interplay, iNEWS, ISIS, Mbox, 
MediaCentral, Media Composer, NewsCutter, Pro Tools, ProSet and RealSet, Maestro, PlayMaker, Sibelius, Symphony, and all related 
product names and logos, are registered or unregistered trademarks of Avid Technology, Inc. in the United States and/or other countries. 
The Interplay name is used with the permission of the Interplay Entertainment Corp. which bears no responsibility for Avid products. All 
other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.  For a full list of Avid trademarks, see: http://www.avid.com/US/about-avid/
legal-notices/trademarks.
Adobe and Photoshop are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Adobe Systems Incorporated in the United States and/or other 
countries. Apple and Macintosh are trademarks of Apple Computer, Inc., registered in the U.S. and other countries. Windows is either a 
registered trademark or trademark of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks contained 
herein are the property of their respective owners. 
What’s New for Media Composer • Created 11/8/22
