A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  1
MANUAL
 
(smd)
 
version 1.11
 
 

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  2
Dear Client,
Thank you for choosing the D&R AIRENCE-USB mixer.
The AIRENCE-USB was designed by Radio Broadcast professionals along with the D&R design team and is intended to be  
used 24 hours per day as an “On-Air” mixer and/or a production console in the most demanding production room.
We are confident that you will be using the AIRENCE-USB mixer for many years to come, and wish you much success.
We value suggestions from our clients and would be grateful if you could email us with your comments  
at sales@d-r.nl when you are familiar with the AIRENCE-USB mixer.
We learn from the ideas and suggestions of customers like you and appreciate your time taken to eventually do this.
With kind regards,
Duco de Rijk
MD

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  3
QUICK START INSTRUCTIONS
To fully benefit from your mixer you need a clean audio set up of the main unit and eventually the extender unit. 
 
MAIN UNIT CONNECTIONS 
Make sure you start to connect the main unit only to your Control Room Monitors and no other equipment.
It means that the CRM cinch connectors audio pin connects to pin 2 of an active monitor and the ground connects to pin 1 and 3 
of the XLR of your active Monitor speaker set. Or use a ready made Cinch to XLR cable.
The AIRENCE is not grounded so your monitor speakers may be grounded but not yet switched on.
NOTE: In 2022 we have designed new 12 volt 5Amp 
power supplies for both the main and extender unit.
Do NOT combine a new unit with an earlier design, 
it will damage the electronics.
 
Now connect the power supply to the mixer and connect the the mixer to a power source.
Turn the CRM potentiometer fully left and switch the active monitors (or your power amp) on.
Turn up the input volume of the speakers half way and listen if the speakers are quiet.
If not remove the input cable from the speakers and listen again. if this quiet again, then connect the speakers again and pull the 
Cinch connectors out of the AIRENCE mixer and listen again. if the noise dissappears, then check your cables  carefully.
Now turn up the volume of the CRM potentiometer slowly and listen if the noise is not increasing too much. (a little noise is acceptable). Now connect an audio source such as CD player to one of the inputs and adjust the gain with the CUE activated so the 
ledbar will indicate sufficient level. Now activate the ON switch and slowly move the fader up until a sounf is heard. If it is getting 
to loud reduce the CRM level until the fader is fully up. Now reduce the CRM speakers input gain controls in a way the mixer’s 
CRM can be increased up to 75% and the signal is pretty loud.
The next step is to connect your PC to your system with a USB cable that came with the mixer.
If the noise in the CRM increases try to unground your PC or your monitor speakers.
In some cases (dependent upon PC brand) a high frequency USB noise can de detected.
We then advice to use an USB isolator in between the AIRENCE mixer and the PC.
Installation of the play-out software is instructed in the manuals of the play-out software.
EXTENDER UNIT CONNECTIONS
Installation of the Extender unit goes as written below.
Disconnect both the Main unit and the Extender unit fror the power supply.
Now use the 15 pole Sub-D cable that comes with the Extender unit and connect it to the main unit. Make sure the screws are 
tightened secure. Connect the power supply of the Extender unit to the mains and also of the main unit. Switch the CRMonitor 
off and connect the main unit and Extender to the mains power and switch on the CRM. Now listen of there is an increase in 
noise (a little is acceptable). If there is asubstantial increase in noise the following grounding can help.
as an option use and extra spare Cinch cable and disconnect the signal conductor, so only the ground wire is still connected. Now 
push the cinch connector on an unused Cinch connector on the main unit and on the Extender unit. This should reduce eventually present noise. You can also use 2 XLR cables with only pin 1 connected by a thick ground cable.
If this helps we can add a ground terminal to your mixer if needed.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  4
INTRODUCTION MAIN MIXER UNIT 
The AIRENCE-USB MAIN mixer is designed as a 6 channel ON-AIR/Production mixer that can be expanded with one or more 6 
channel extender units until you have sufficient inputs. There is no limit to the number of extender units because every unit has 
its own power supply and its own low noise summing amps.
USB Module 1-4
•	
4x Professional extremely low noise balanced Mic pre-amps with 48 volt phantom powering.
•	
Two pairs of line inputs Line and USB.
•	
Gain control with pre MIC trimmer.
•	
Three band stereo very musical equalizer.
•	
Sub and Program routing.
•	
Stereo Aux send.
•	
Stereo CUE switch for pre fade listening + CONTROL.
•	
ON (incl. start switch, when fader is up) + CONTROL.
•	
100 mm professional K-Alps fader with fader start.
	
TELCO-1 and 2 Module or/and VoIP
•	
2 switchable Telephone-Line inputs.
•	
R and C balance for side tone rejection.(not with a 
VoIp Gain control for incoming signal.
•	
Large CONNECTION and TALKBACK switches.
•	
Sub and Program routing.
•	
Stereo Aux send.
•	
Stereo CUE switch for pre-fade listening. 
•	
Telephone signaling (default) or ON (start switch).
•	
100 mm professional K-Alps fader with fader start.
 
MASTER SECTION
•	
2 Long throw K-ALPS master faders.
•	
Master controls for AUX/SUB/STUDIO/PHONES/ANNOUNCER.
•	
CRM section with Mute-Act dimming and Follow Phones.
•	
PROGRAM mono switch.
•	
AUX RETURN to CUE/SUB/PROG.
•	
PHONES with PROGRAM/CUE Balance control or split with CUE on the left and PROGRAM on the right.
•	
RECORD OUT fed from PROGRAM/SUB/AUX.
•	
ANNOUNCER OUTPUT fed from Follow Phones or Prog.
•	
BUILT IN TALKBACK MIC routable to SUB/AUX/STUDIO/ANNOUNCER.
•	
NON-STOP switch routes one of the 4 USB stereo inputs directly to the main program XLR connectors.
AIRENCE EXTENDER UNIT
All triple Input Modules have the following features 
•	
Professional low noise balanced Mic pre-amp with 48 volt phantom powering.
•	
Two pairs of line inputs with optional R.I.A.A. pre-amp on line-B for turntables.
•	
Gain control with pre MIC trimmer.
•	
Three band stereo equalizer.
•	
Sub and Program routing.
•	
Stereo Aux send.
•	
Stereo CUE switch for pre fade listening.
•	
ON (including start switch, when fader is up.
•	
100mm professional K-Alps fader with fader start.
•	
Possibility to connect a Studio Remote unit with “Cough Mute” and CUE “Communication plus Headphone connection.
•	
Two MIC ON busses to separately control the Control Room and/or Studio mute.  
The extender unit has an external (digitally) switched high efficiency power supply and 1x Sub-D chassis connector for audio/control linking to the main unit and a second Sub-D chassis connector for audio/control linking to a third Extender unit. 
Every AIRENCE EXTender unit will be supplied with 1 meter audio extender cable and a power supply that can accept an  
AC voltage between 90-230 volts at 50/60 Hz.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  5
AIRENCE MAIN UNIT BACKPANEL
The Main’s section back panel shows all the in and output connectors to interface with your other equipment.  
The first 1 to 4 MIC/LINE/USB modules on the right have balanced XLR mic inputs with a mic insert for voice processing. 
A start connector to activate red light signalling individually or this reed relay can be used to close (or pulse) a start contact to 
activate equipment connected to the line input. Two cinch connectors accept these line left/right input signals.
Telco 1/2 have 2 RJ-11 standardized telephone connectors, a stereo line input, in case you do not need the internal Hybrid modules and a START jack that can switch (default) an external Telephone signaling device. Or you can re-jumper the function of the 
start jack connector to control external equipment when the line input is selected.
The master section houses all the in and outputs of the controls on the front panel that we go into detail in other chapters.  
Most of the functions are self explanatory, such as master right and left XLR’s and all the other in and outputs.
Worth mentioning is the redundant extra power supply connector where an optional redundant power supply can be connected 
and the SUB-D slave connection to the extender unit.
And of course the USB connector that carries all the 4 stereo audio signals to and from the PC (for both Windows & Macintosh 
computers) as well as the Play-out systems control info from the programmable Control section plus the Clock and meter information. This USB feature will allow to connect to the Internet via your computer for “Live” streaming of audio to the Internet.
AIRENCE-EXTENDER BACKPANEL
The back panel of the Extender unit provides you with 6 balanced XLR’s for Mic input signals, an insert for processors, start 
switch and two pairs of Cinch connectors for the stereo left right line inputs.
On the left you see the 5 pin XLR connector for the external switched (high efficiency) power supply and the Sub-D connectors 
for linking to the main unit and to possible extra Extenders units. A 1 meter cable is part of the delivery of the Extender unit.
There is no limit in connecting more than one Extender unit to the main unit. The extra inputs in a second (or third) Extender 
unit are connected to the Sub-D connector labelled “to third(next) Unit”. Every Extender unit needs his own power supply which 
of course is part of the delivery.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  6
AIRENCE MAIN UNIT TRIPLE INPUT MODULES 1-4
The input modules switches & controls of the main AIRENCE mixer have the following functions:  
Each of Modules 1 thru 4 has three selectable inputs. The three types of inputs consist of a Microphone 
input a stereo line input and an USB input. In the Mic switch position, the module is a normal mono module. When the Mic is switched out(up position), you have the choice out of a stereo Line level inputs or 
USB stereo inputs to feed the stereo AUX send ,PROGRAM and or SUB stereo mix busses. 
GAIN
With the gain control (the first control knob below the modules number), the source input level can be adjusted to the required internal mixer level. This control adjusts both the Mic input and the stereo Line/USB 
inputs with the same control depending on the switch positions. Mic gain can be more precisely controlled 
with the small trimmer positioned just above the High EQ control. A small flat screwdriver is needed.
Try it in this way, if you cannot achieve enough Mic gain when the gain control is fully turned clockwise, 
only then you slowly turn to the right to increase the gain to the desired level. Also a mic only low cut 
filter is built in, but this can only be reached/set when the bottom of the console is removed. There are 
more jumper settings in the console, so we advice to make a (jumper)plan for your situation and then 
do all the internal jumper settings in one go. Or tell us through your dealer how you want the jumpers 
selected and we deliver the console as requested.
 
STEREO LINE/USB
The stereo line input is a high impedance input ( >10 kOhm) for connecting the stereo line level outputs of 
devices such as CD players/MP3 players etc. The USB stereo signal comes directly from one of the 4 stereo 
USB channels from your PC play-out software. These are already assigned in the Mixer by D&R.  
PC play-out Channel nr 1 can be listen to in module 1 and this is also the case for channel 2, 3 and 4.
To match the incoming levels to a convenient control range, internal trimmers are available labelled VR2 
(right) and VR3 (left). This also can only be done with the frame dismantled and should be done at the 
same time that you do the jumper selections. Also the source selector for the NON-STOP switching is 
on the module as a jumper. The main output XLR’s on the mixer can directly receive a stereo signal from 
Program pre/Program Post/Sub or Aux. A Picture will be shown in the manual how to achieve all these 
settings the way you want it. If a USB signal is present the led on the right side of the Line/USB switch will 
be lit.
MIC
The Mic input has a balanced XLR input connector with 48 volt phantom powering for condenser mikes. 
The Mic-pre circuitry uses the latest technology studio-class components as used in high end recording 
consoles, we use the That 1510 Mic-pre which is highly acclaimed for its low noise/distortion and transparent audio. The low-noise design and excellent phase spec that D&R is known for is integrated throughout the AIRENCE-USB which results in a phase coherent signal path. Using balanced microphones & cables 
allows for the quietest and high quality audio signals throughout your AIRENCE-USB mixer. You can use 
standard balanced Mic cables available at any pro audio dealer or music store. The AIRENCE-USB uses 
chassis-mount female XLR type Mic input connectors. Any standard pro audio Mic cable will fit into this 
female XLR connector. 
EQUALIZER
Each module has a stereo three band equalizer to control the high, mid, and low frequencies individually. 
The D&R designers used carefully chosen frequencies in the equalizer circuitry to enhance the Mic input 
as well as the stereo A & B line inputs.
SUB
This switch routes the post Fader signal directly to the SUB buss, this SUB buss can be used to make a sub 
mix for recording or any other creative process.
PROG(RAM)
This switch routes the post Fader signal directly to the PROGRAM buss. 
AUX SEND
The next control is a stereo Aux send that sends stereo source signals to the stereo Aux send buss Master 
(or SUB buss) and then to the output connectors on the Master back panel. The stereo Aux send is for 
external effects such as reverb, echo or headphone amplifiers. Each Aux send can be set pre or post fader 
by changing jumper settings on the circuit board of each module. The factory default is post fader.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  7
CUE/COMMUNICATION BUSS 
Below the AUX SEND is the stereo CUE switch (Pre Fade Listening), this switch allows you to check the 
signal before you raise your channel fader up and mix it with other signals in the mixer.   
Another smart function is that this CUE bus can be used for communication.  If you push a DJ’s Cue (let’s 
say channel one) and if you then push the Telco Cue, the DJ as well as the caller can hear each other outside the broadcast and even you, sitting behind the desk on the monitor speakers. 
Note: Levels need to be carefully set to avoid feedback and overdrive of circuits.
The Cue switch also sends out HID signal over USB that can be programmed to do specific functions in 
your play-out system. In the Control section of the manual we will explain how.
 
ON
The ON switch is used to pass on the audio and at the same time generates a start signal for turntables, 
CD players, and jingle or cart machines. This switch sends out a momentary pulse or shortens continuously two pins of the Start connector on the back panel of the console. A jumper setting on the PCB let’s 
you choose between pulse and continuously.  
The ON switch also sends out HID signal over USB that can be programmed to do specific functions in your 
play-out system. In the Control section of the manual we will explain how.
 
FADER
Final audio level control is the high quality, 100 mm long throw K-Alps stereo channel fader with integrated fader start switch. At the beginning of the fader movement you will feel an integrated start switch that 
closes when you bring up the fader. This switch activates the start circuitry that is connected to the Start 
Connector on the module back panel as described earlier. If the Mute-Act(ive) switch in the master section 
is activated, positioned close to the CRM volume knob (and there is also one close to the Studio volume 
knob), the control room level (or Studio level) will be dimmed by 20dB when in the input module Mic is 
selected. At the same time a USB HID (Human Interface Device) signal is sent to the USB bus for controlling a function in your play-out software. 
On the pcb there is a jumper setting where you can select if you want and extra 10dB of fader gain. Then  
the unity gain position will be at the -10dB position. If you are a person that sweeps the fader fully up and 
down, then do not select the extra fader gain of 10dB and choose for a unity gain position in the fully up 
position of the fader. A jumper setting page will be shown further in this manual to customize the AIRENCE 
to your needs.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  8
AIRENCE MAIN UNIT TRIPLE INPUT USB MODULES 1-4
INPUT CONNECTORS
On the back of modules 1 thru 4, you find five connectors for each module.
The stereo line input uses Cinch female type connectors.  
Being un-balanced, the shield and (-) or out of phase signal wire need to 
be connected together and seen as ground during installation.
In order to use the START switch, it requires two pins in the ¼” stereo connector located on the back panel to be wired. 
The tip and ring are shorted when the ON switch plus fader switch is activated. Once you have done this, a quick start turntable can be started via 
a shorted contact action in the ¼” stereo connector with the ON switch or 
with the Fader, whatever your preference is, but only if the START connector is wired on the back panel.  
If your turntable only needs a pulse to start, ask your dealer. Or if you 
know how to temporarily remove the cover frame of the AIRENCE you can change a jumper setting to a momentary action, so it 
can be used as a pulse start switch.
Connections on the START connector can only be used for a maximum of 24 Volts at 50 mA.  Please contact your dealer if you are 
uncertain.
*NEVER CONNECT AC POWER VOLTAGE TO THIS REMOTE-JACK*
Or you can activate a function in your play-out software by USB HID instructions that will be explained later in the USB CONTROL 
section of the manual.
INSERT
This ring/tip/sleeve stereo jack socket let’s you insert signal processors such as compressors/gates or special voice processing 
units to improve your voice to sound like the ultimate announcer/D.J.  
The Ring of the stereo jack sends the PRE-FADER channel signal and the Tip accepts the return signal.
On the right you see the type of cable you need when your processor has jack in and outputs. Connect the tip from the stereo 
cable to the tip of one of the mono jacks and the ring of the stereo cable to the tip of the other mono jack.
Now insert the stereo jack into the AIRENCE’s insert and connect 
the mono jack that produces a hum when the tip is touched by 
your finger (and the related channel fader is open) into the processors output. The other mono jack should be inserted into the 
processors input.  
In case your processor has XLR inputs connect the tip of the stereo 
jack to pin 2 of the Female XLR and short pin 1  and 3 with each 
other and connect to ground (sleeve), this also goes for the other  
Male XLR, connect the ring of the stereo jack (which sends signals) 
to a male XLR pin2. Short here pin 1 and 3 and solder to ground (sleeve). This has to be done because the insert is not balanced.
See below the cable type you need. 
MICROPHONE INPUT
The Mic input is a balanced female XLR type connector., see the left connector 
below that should go into your mixer and your mic cable should end in a male 
XLR as seen on the right section of the picture.
1=Ground/shield
2=Hot (in phase)
3=Cold (out of Phase).

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  9
SPECIAL OPTIONS FOR USB MODULES 1 - 4 (PCB AIRENCE-2)
Located on the input channel circuit boards are several jumpers that can be changed to enable different configurations of the 
USB Triple input channel settings.  If changes are required, we advise you to contact your local dealer to have these changes performed. But if you know something about electronics and are not afraid to open up your mixer you can do it yourself.
But... before you do anything power must be removed from the console of course. The metal cover frame must be removed to 
be able to reach the modules jumpers. This is something you need to do only once before installation. 
HOW TO REMOVE THE BOTTOM OF YOUR MIXER
First remove the 3 bolts below the faders that hold the cover, then put the mixer upside down on a soft surface.
You see on the back panel side of the cover again 3 bolts that needs to be removed.
Also on the left and right side of the frame there are 2 bolts that needs to be removed.
Once you have done this you can lift the cover from the front and the back panel of the mixer.
Use a tweezer to lift and replace the jumpers. When the flat cables are in the way, remove them by carefully lift the cables out of 
the headers.
It is also advisable to make up you mind how you want the AIRENCE to do his job for you. Let me show you first a list of jumper 
settings and what you can achieve with changing the jumper settings.
I will also inform you about the factory default setting and what is does. 
The jumper settings on the next page and trimmers can be changed to adjust the AIRENCE to your needs.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  10
SPECIAL OPTIONS FOR USB MODULES 1 - 4 (PCB AIRENCE-2)
   PCB Location
JUMPERS
DEFAULT
DESCRIPTION
J15
Phantom ON
48 volt phantom power on/off via Jumper 
J15.
J3 
Low cut ON
Low cut filter on Mic input done by shorting all 4 pins on Jumper J3. 
Removal of both jumpers gives no low cut 
function
 
J11/J12
Fader gain 
0dB
Fader gain can be set to change the post 
fader gain from 0db to +10dB
(you need to do this for both left and 
right signals!)
J6/J16
AUX POST
Stereo Aux send pre or post selectable 
via Jumper J6/J16 
J17
Start pulse
Continuously
Pulse/Continuously Jumper J17 to change 
the start pulse from latching (continuously) to pulse.
J10
NON STOP 
SELECTION
prog post
NON STOP Source selection. These jumpers, when placed make a connection from 
the output of the module’s USB chip to 
the NON STOP switch in the master section.
J5
USB OUTPUT
Prog-Pre
Output USB source selector.  
Here you determine which signal will be 
send to the PC
VR2/3
USB INPUT 
LEVEL 
0dBu
USB chip input trimmer left/right
      
J18
MIC ON
ON
This jumper allows you to send a  
MIC-ON control signal to the MIC-ON bus 
1, which is CRM-MUTE or to MIC-ON bus 
2, which is Studio Mute.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  11
JUMPERS
DEFAULT
PLEASE DO NOT CHANGE BELOW 
JUMPERS IN ANY WAY
J7
Module-1
Logic Port selector: 1-2 START / 3-4 
ON / 5-6 CUE
 
Module-2
Logic Port selector: 7-8 START / 9-10 
ON / 11-12 CUE
 
Module-3
Logic Port selector: 13-14 START / 1516 ON / 17-18 CUE
 
Module-4
Logic Port selector: 19-20 START / 2122 ON / 23-24 CUE
J9
Module-1
USB Port Selector 1-2 and 3-4 
Module-2
USB Port Selector 5-6 and 7-8
Module-1
USB Port Selector 9-10 and 11-12
Module-1
USB Port Selector 13-14 and 15-16

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  12
SETTING UP THE USB  MODULES
Above pictured you see a section of the USB pcb where you can decide which output signal is sent to the USB connector.
The default setting is PROG POST, it means a post master stereo fader signal is sent to the USB connector and to your PC.
You can change this by moving both yellow jumpers two steps to the left, now you have a PROG PRE master fader signal to the USB connector. 
There are also options to get a signal from the  Sub output or the AUX output. Be aware that you always have to jumper for both the left and 
the right signal! The level is set by the master faders of the mixer when PROG POST post (default) is selected. 
USB LEVEL TRIMMERS
On the top left of the picture above you also have two trimmers (VR2 and VR3) that adjust the level that is sent to the USB chip in the AIRENCE 
and thus adjust the outgoing level to your PC for left and right signal for the selected jumper setting discussed earlier.  
This is especially important for Windows 7 that recognizes the AIRENCE-USB chips we use as mic level signals. A lower output level coming from 
the AIRENCE-USB will greatly improve performance. We have no experience with WINDOWS-8 at the moment, but we will update the manual 
as soon as we have done some tests. Also imbalances between left and right could be corrected by these trimmers.
An audio application needs to run on your PC to be able to see the levels. Or else trial and error is the only way.
A free downloadable tool is to be found here http://minorshill.co.uk/pc2/testgen.html
 
To be able to adjust this level you need to remove the bottom plate of the AIRENCE to access the trimmers, see the description on page 8.
 
The return signal coming from the PC USB is fixed but can be adjusted with the AIRENCE modules Gain control.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  13
SETTING UP THE USB  MODULES
In order to set up a connection between your computer and the AIRENCE-USB mixer, use 
a standard USB cable available from any local computer shop. (See picture). When connecting the AIRENCE-USB to your computer, the computer (PC or Mac) will recognize the 
AIRENCE as new hardware and will establish a connection to any audio programs needing 
audio hardware. After establishing a connection, there is no need to download drivers or 
performing complicated setup routines, just plug in the USB cable to your Windows or Mac 
computer and start tracking! (or playing a maximum of 4 stereo channels at the same time)
If you want to know more about USB try this link
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Audio_Stream_Input/Output
If you are already familiar with digital audio recording, the latest versions of Kristal Audio Engine and Audacity are available free 
of charge via the Internet. Use this link http://www.asio4all.com/ for third party downloads.
UNDERSTANDING  INTERNET  RADIO
One of the key features of the AIRENCE is you can set up your own Internet radio station from your home or office and have your 
friends listen to your broadcasts, be it music, talkshows, political, or religious programming. 
For more information on the Internet, follow the web links below.  
NOTE: D&R does not accept responsibility for the content of the following links or sites.  
How it works	
	
: http://www.shoutcast.com/support/docs/ 
Winamp 	
	
: http://classic.winamp.com/ 
Shoutcast server 		
: http://www.shoutcast.com/download/serve.phtml// 
Shoutcast dsp plugin 	
: http://www.shoutcast.com/download/
 
The following paragraphs concerning the Internet might give you a better understanding about Internet radio. 
If you wish to set up a broadcast and you are a do-it-yourself kind of person - you might do well creating your own online radio 
station by using your own personal computer to create a dedicated server for doing the job. Some of the software options for 
getting this done include: 
 
SHOUTcast: 
SHOUTcast is one of the original free Internet radio software solutions for streaming audio. You can start your own station fairly 
easily and the software is free to download. 
http://radio.about.com/gi/o.htm?zi=1/XJ&zTi=1&sdn=radio&cdn=gadgets&tm=23&gps=562_409_1302_762&f=00&su
=p504.1.336.ip_&tt=2&bt=1&bts=1&zu=http%3A//www.shoutcast.com/download
 
Helix Server Basic 
Free streaming media server software which can distribute live and on-demand video and other media. Realnetworks.com 
describes it as: “Simple 5-stream server. This free media server is a great solution if you are getting started with streaming media 
and want to experiment before rolling it out to a large audience.” The Helix Server Basic is free to download. 
http://www.realnetworks.com/products-services/free-helix-products.aspx 
 
Quicktime Streaming Server 
Apple.com says: “Whether you are looking to add streaming media to your web site, deliver distance learning or provide rich 
content for your mobile subscribers, Mac OS X Server has all of the tools you need. QuickTime Streaming Server lets you deliver 
live or prerecorded content in real time over the Internet.” You can find out more at apple.com. 
http://www.apple.com/quicktime/streamingserver/ 
 
Quicktime Broadcaster 
Apple.com writes: “Combining the power of QuickTime with Apple’s ease of use, QuickTime Broadcaster allows just about anyone to produce a live broadcast event.” Download this software from apple.com 
http://www.apple.com/quicktime/broadcaster/ 
 
Peercast 
Peercast.org is a non-profit website that provides free peer-to-peer broadcasting software. “PeerCast is a simple, free way to 
listen to radio and watch video on the Internet. It uses P2P technology to let anyone become a broadcaster without the costs of 
traditional streaming,” according to the peercast.org website. http://www.peercast.org/ 
 
Icecast 
Icecast is “free server software for streaming multimedia.” Download a copy from icecast.org. 
http://www.icecast.org/ 
Andromeda 
Andromeda is delivery-on-demand software. “Andromeda scans your MP3s and presents them as a fully-featured streaming Web 
site. That means you simply add, move, rename, and delete files and folders to update the contents of your Andromeda-powered 
site. It’s as easy as drag, drop, stream,” according to turnstyle.com where you can download an evaluation copy. 
http://www.turnstyle.com/andromeda/

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  14
TELCO-LINE MODULE 1-2 CONNECTORS, CONTROLS, & FUNCTIONS
Input modules Telco 1&2 have integrated Hybrid circuitry with built in high quality Telephone Hybrids as well as stereo line inputs 
in case only one Hybrid is needed.
Highlights are:
	
* High quality Telephone Hybrid circuit to directly connect to phone lines.
	
* Stereo line input.
	
* Gain control.
	
* Telco send Control.
	
* Direct access CONNect and TB (Talk Back) switches.
	
* Stereo Aux send.
	
* Stereo CUE switch for pre fade listening.
	
* Start (ON) switch for telephone signaling and 100mm smooth professional faders.
	
WHAT IS A TELEPHONE HYBRID?
Telephone hybrids are hardware interfaces between professional audio equipment and public telephone 
networks. They provide protection for your equipment and the public telephone lines, allowing for various 
line signals and line conditions. Automatically canceling out the unwanted signal, they facilitate two-way 
communication when using a single 2 wire telephone line.  Each AIRENCE-USB hybrid module has a Telephone 
line (WALL) connection and a handset connection. Thousands of D&R Telephone Hybrids (also built into this 
AIRENCE-USB) are used in radio and television broadcasting facilities around the World allowing external callers to be connected to the studio mixer for live broadcast. Many of the D&R Telephone Hybrids are supplied 
to radio stations allowing extremely effective conversion between 4-wire audio circuits and standard 2 wire 
telephone lines. 
Specs: 
Output	 	
: Internally connected in the AIRENCE. 
Input	
	
: Line level 0 dBu balanced, internally connected in the AIRENCE. 
R/C balance	
: fully adjustable.
Separation	
: more than 30dB. 
TELCO SEND
With this control you adjust the level of the outgoing signal to the telephone line.
PHONE / LINE INPUT SWITCH
When switched to the stereo line input, you have a high impedance line level input for connecting cart 
machines, iPods, tape machines, or CD players. The up position of this switch changes this module into a full 
blown telephone Hybrid module. It is a Hybrid that can be connected to any standard telephone line.
R-BALANCE
Internal potentiometer (screwdriver control) to adjust for maximum side tone attenuation via top panel hole.
C-BALANCE
16 position rotary switch to select the optimum side tone (your own send signal coming back from the telephone line) attenuation.
GAIN
With the GAIN control, the source level is adjusted to the internal mixer level.  
This is for both the Telephone Line input and the Stereo Line inputs (when selected)
CONNect
This switch (when pushed) picks up the phone line when a call comes in. Note: the incoming call will not be 
heard until the CUE is pressed or the ON switch and the fader are activated which brings the signal to the 
mixer. You can of course have a handset with dial possibility to dial and pick up calls from the caller first before you connect the caller to the mixer by pushing the CONNect button. To hear the caller you have to push 
the CUE button and to bring the caller on-air push the ON switch and pull up de fader.
TALKBACK
By pushing the TB switch on the Hybrid module, the internal talkback microphone is activated and allows you to talk to the caller 
without being ON-Air.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  15
AUX SEND
Below the TB switch is the stereo Aux send that can be set to send stereo source signals pre or post fader (pre or post jumper 
settings on the circuit board). The factory default is post fader. 
ROUTING
Each input module has SUB and PROG(ram) routing switches to route the stereo signal to either the SUB bus, 
Program bus or both at the same time, or... not at all.
CUE
Next you will see the stereo CUE switch (Pre Fader Listening). This switch allows you to check the signal before 
you mix it with your other channel signals in the mixer. A second very important function is that this Cue buss 
is also designed to be a N-1 communication buss.  It means that a caller hears any signal connected to this 
Cue buss  except his own signal. So communication between a DJ channel and the caller is possible without 
having to mix in the DJ channel and the caller in the broadcast.
RING (LED)
This LED lights to alert you when a call comes in,. You can also connect a warning light to the START jack to be 
visually informed that a call comes in (when you wear headphones).
ON
The ON switch is used to activate the module and generate a signal to start turntables, CD players, cart or 
jingle machines. This switch sends out a momentary pulse (default) or switches permanently (continuously) 
between tip and ring of the Start connector on the back of the console. You can also use this START connector 
to control an external  Ring indicator that a call is coming in. This is the default setting of the related jumper. 
You will notice that the internal LED of the ON switch will not light when pushed as long as the fader is not up 
alerting you that there is no signal sent to the busses (Program or Sub). 
FADER
Final control of the channel is the 100mm long throw K-Alps stereo channel fader with integrated fader start 
switch. The channel fader sends the amount of signal from the associated channel to the master mix buss.  
At the right side of the fader you see a dB labelling starting at the top with no attenuation (0) and sliding 
down it attenuates in steps of 5dB until it reaches a full cut off below -90dB. When  you are used to fully 
throw the fader in its top position when opening a channel it is advisable to set the fader gain jumper to 0dB 
(factory default). If you need a little bit of “playground” for your audio, set the jumper to +10dB fader gain 
and see the -10dB (10) position as your unity gain position. At the beginning of the fader movement you will 
feel an internally built in start switch that is activated when you bring up the fader. This switch activates the 
start circuitry and controls externally connected devices such as CD players etc (via the Start connector on the 
back).
INPUT CONNECTORS
On the back of each of the AIRENCE-TELCO modules 1 and 2 you find five connectors. Two unbalanced stereo 
line RCA Cinch connectors for connecting CD players, iPods, or any playback devices as long as they are line level equipment. The level can be 
set using the gain control to match most source levels. The left RCA/
Cinch connector is the right input and the right RCA/Cinch connector is 
the left input. The shield needs to be connected to the ground or case 
of the RCA/Cinch connector. The START switch has two active connections to be wired. The tip and ring are shorted when the ON switch or 
fader switch is activated. Default the tip and ring are shorted when a 
call is coming in to alert someone is calling the studio. In case Fader 
start is jumpered, you can start a turntable with the ON (if connected 
to the START connector) switch on the back panel. These switches quick 
start turntables through the remote jack by a continuous contact action 
between tip and ring at the back of the mixer.  If your turntable only 
needs a pulse to start ask your dealer to modify the internal circuitry to change it into a 
momentary action, so you can use it as a pulse start switch. 
*NEVER CONNECT ELECTRICAL POWER TO THIS REMOTE-JACK*
Connections on the START connector should only be made with a maximum of 24 Volts by 
50 mA.  Please contact your dealer in case of doubt. The two RJ11 connectors connect the 
Module to the telephone utility companies phone line connection (Wall) and to your telephone appliance (Phone) so you can 
dial-out to people you want to interview or your radio program listeners.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  16
SPECIAL AVAILABLE OPTIONS IN YOUR AIRENCE-TELCO MODULE 
On the PCB of your TELCO AIRENCE module there are several jumpers and 2 trimmers that can be changed/trimmed to enable different configurations of the channel settings. This should be done by a D&R dealer, service center or yourselves if you are not afraid of electronics and 
screwdrivers. But... be sure to remove the mains cable(s) first!! 
PICTURES
JUMPERS
DEFAULT
DESCRIPTION
J11/19
POST
Stereo Aux send pre or post selectable via Jumper J11/9 (post is 
default).
J4/J5
0dB
Fader gain can be set to change the post fader gain from 0db to 
+10dB
(you need to do this for both left and right signals!)
J17
Continuesly
Pulse/continuous Jumper J17 to change the start pulse from latching 
(continuously) to pulse.
J11/9
Ring
Ring Detection is default set on the left 2 positions.
Moving the jumpers to the right positions changes the START into a 
start jack.
VR2/VR3
Factory 
adjusted
Prog pre left and right level trim to cancel out return signals (these 
are adjusted at the factory, please do not touch them without measuring equipment.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  17
VoIP-LINE MODULE 5 or/and  6 CONNECTORS, CONTROLS, & FUNCTIONS
Input module 5 or and 6 are dedicated Voice over IP Telephone module and also has a stereo line input in 
case a classisc Hybrid is needed.
Highlights are:
* High quality Telephone Hybrid circuit to directly connect to the Internet.
* Stereo line input.
* Gain control.
* VoIP/Telco send Control.
* Direct access CONNect and TB (Talk Back) switches in the master section.
* Stereo Aux send.
* Stereo CUE switch for pre fade listening.
* Start (ON) switch and 100mm smooth professional fader.
VoIP-CHANNEL
In the AIRENCE USB we have built in an interface that let you connect to the Internet community by way of 
(for instance) Skype. Skype is freely available communication software that can be used to call and receive 
calls of your listeners to your broadcast station. We have designed a separate USB connector on the backpanel of your console to interface with SKYPE software. This could be on the same PC (on a second USB 
connector) as the Play-out system is installed or on a separate PC for dedicated use of the VoIP chan-nel 
with SKYPE software. For downloading the SKYPE software go to http://www.skype.com and then to your 
own language for more support. There are some SKYPE software settings you need to go through before 
this is working with your console. For some usefull instructions go to:
https://support.skype.com/nl/faq/FA34541/een-perfect-skype-gesprek-voeren
(Dutch instruction video, but I am sure there is one in your own language or in English of course). 
GAIN
With the GAIN control, the source level is adjusted to the internal mixer level.
This is for both the VoIP and the Stereo Line input (when selected) 
VoIP(TELCO)-LINE SWITCH
When switched to the VoIP (Phone) position only the VoIP signal is received. When this switch is up, you 
have a high impedance stereo line level input for connecting an external Hybrid or... cart machines, iPods, 
tape machines, CD players etc. 
VoIP (TELCO) SEND
With this level control the outgoing signal from the mixer is sent to the caller via Skype or and via an external connected Hybrid. This is for both the VoIP and the Stereo Line input (when selected). This Hybrid get’s 
it send sighnal from the cleanfeed output on the back of the console. . 
CONNect
This switch (when pushed) picks up the VoIP/Hybrid signal when a call comes in. Note: the incoming call 
will not be heard until the CUE is pressed or the ON switch and the fader are activated which brings the 
signal to the mixer. You can of course have a handset with dial possibility to dial and pick up calls from the 
caller first before you connect the caller to the mixer by pushing the CONNect button. To hear the caller 
you have to push the CUE button and to bring the caller on-air push the ON switch and pull up the fader.
TALKBACK
By pushing the TB switch on the VoIP module, the internal talkback microphone is activated and allows you 
to talk to the caller without being ON-Air.
ROUTING
Each input module has SUB and PROG(ram) routing switches to route the stereo signal to either the SUB 
bus, Program bus or both at the same time, or... not at all.
AUX SEND
Below the TB switch is the stereo Aux send that can be set to send stereo source signals pre or post fader 
(pre or post jumper settings on the circuit board). The factory default is post fader.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  18
CUE
Next you will see the stereo CUE switch (Pre Fader Listening). This switch allows you to check the signal 
before you mix it with your other channel signals in the mixer. A second very important function is that this 
Cue buss is also designed to be a N-1 communication buss.  It means that a caller hears any signal connected 
to this Cue buss  except his own signal. So communication between a DJ channel and the caller is possible 
without having to mix in the DJ channel and the caller in the broadcast.
RING (LED)
This LED lights to alert you when a call comes in. You can also connect a warning light to the START jack to be 
visually informed that a call comes in (when you wear headphones).
ON
The ON switch is used to activate the module. This switch sends out a momentary pulse (default) or switches 
permanently (continuously) between tip and ring of the Start connector on the back of the console. You can 
also use this START connector to control an external  Ring indicator that a call is coming in. This is the default 
setting of the related jumper. You will notice that the internal LED of the ON switch will not light when pushed 
as long as the fader is not up alerting you that there is no signal sent to the busses (Program or Sub). 
FADER
Final control of the channel is the 100mm long throw K-Alps stereo channel fader with integrated fader start 
switch. The channel fader sends the amount of signal from the associated channel to the master mix buss.  
At the right side of the fader you see a dB labelling starting at the top with no attenuation (0) and sliding 
down it attenuates in steps of 5dB until it reaches a full cut off below -90dB. When  you are used to fully 
throw the fader in its top position when opening a channel it is advisable to set the fader gain jumper to 0dB 
(factory default). If you need a little bit of “playground” for your audio, set the jumper to +10dB fader gain 
and see the -10dB (10) position as your unity gain position. At the beginning of the fader movement you will 
feel an internally built in start switch that is activated when you bring up the fader. This switch activates the 
start circuitry and controls externally connected devices such as CD players etc (via the Start connector on the 
back).
INPUT CONNECTORS VoIP (Telco2 Telco1)
On the back of each of the AIRENCE-VoIP(TELCO) modules 1 and 2 you find five connectors. Two unbalanced 
stereo line RCA Cinch connectors for connecting CD players, iPods, or any play-back devices as long as they 
are line level equipment. The level can be set using the gain control to match most source levels. The left 
RCA/Cinch connector is the right input and the right RCA/Cinch connector is the left input. The shield needs 
to be connected to the ground or case of the RCA/Cinch connector. 
The START switch has two active connections to be wired. The tip and ring are shorted when the ON switch 
or fader switch is activated. Default the tip and ring are shorted when a call is coming in to alert someone is 
calling the studio. In case Fader start is jumpered, you can start a turntable with the ON (if connected to the 
START connector) switch on the back panel. These switches quick start turntables through the remote jack 
by a continuous contact action between tip and ring at the back of the mixer.  If your turntable only needs a 
pulse to start ask your dealer to modify the internal circuitry to change it into a momentary action, so you can 
use it as a pulse start switch. 
*NEVER CONNECT ELECTRICAL POWER TO THIS REMOTE-JACK*
Connections on the START connector should only be made with a maximum of 24 Volts by 50 mA.   
Please contact your dealer in case of doubt. 
USB CONNECTOR 
The bottom RJ11 connector (Phone) is replaced by a USB connector to 
directly communicate with your PC (internet) via a USB cable connected 
to a spare USB connector on your PC.
CLEANFEED OUTPUT
The top RJ11 connector (WALL) now provides you with a cleanfeed signal 
on pin 1 and 4 to connect to an external Hybrid. 

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  19
AIRENCE MASTER SECTION
The AIRENCE master section houses all the controls for the mix buss Program faders and master controls for Aux return, EXT 
(2-Track) play-back, and master outputs.  Individual functions are described below in sections as shown on the front panel below.
Later version do NOT have the master faders anymore.
 
LEDBAR METERS
The master section has two high-res 11 segment LEDbar meters with VU meter Ballistics. 
Depending on which switch is pressed (CUE on channels, AUX SEND master, SUB, AUX 
RET, EXT, etc.), the master meters will allow the reading of all input and outgoing signals. 
The attack and release time constants conform to International VU meter standards, being 300mSec for attack and decay. The green area of the LEDbar is the safe area and occasionally a red led on is no problem. The output of your AIRENCE-USB is +6dBu (1.55v) 
(“0” VU) when the 0 green LED is on. Both led bars have trimmers for fine adjust and 
other requested display levels.
PROGRAM MONO SWITCH
This switch turns the stereo signal into mono for both main outputs. Using this switch is 
a convenient way to check and balance the left & right signals before going to stereo as 
well as checking the overall Phase response. Also when one side of the stereo signal is 
not available, the mono switch directs the mono signal to both outputs.
EXTERN INPUT
The External(2 TRACK/OFF-AIR) switch allows for playback of the outputs from stereo 
devices such as CD players, tape machines, computer sound cards, iPods, or the OFF-AIR 
signal to be routed to the CRM (monitor buss). Its sensitivity is -10dBv (300mV). Note: 
The Cue system (from anywhere in the mixer) will interrupt the EXT signal when activated.
RECORD OUTPUT (Rec Out)
The AIRENCE has a Record output on Cinch connectors. These outputs can be fed from 
SUB or from AUX or when both are in its up positions the main program Signal is being 
send to these outputs. 
 
AUX SEND
The stereo AUX SEND master controls the sum of the entire individual stereo Aux send 
signals coming from the input channels.
A Cue button let’s you hear what is on the Aux send buss in stereo. 
AUX CUE
The AUX SEND CUE switch allows for the master LED bar meters to display the Aux 
output signal of the Aux master as well as listening to the signal from the AUX buss. It 
is necessary to turn the AUX SEND master control up to be able to create and show an 
outgoing AUX signal.
AUX RETURN
This stereo input is intended to be used for returning the stereo outputs of reverbs or other effects gear and can be routed to the 
Program and SUB bus.  It can also be used to connect the output of other mixers so you don’t use input channels. 
 
CUE AUX RETURN
This switch enables you to listen to an incoming Aux return signal before the AUX RET (Return) control pot.
 
SUB SEND
The stereo SUB SEND master controls the sum of the entire individual selected Sub routing push buttons send signals coming 
from the input channels. A Cue button let’s you hear what is on the Sub send buss

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  20
STUDIO
The AIRENCE has a separate Studio output that normally follows the Program pre-fader left and right signals, but in case a guest 
wants to hear a caller switching to Follow Phones enables him or her to listen tot the CUE system and to communicate with the 
caller outside a broadcast. You can connect the inputs of reverbs from these outputs (with Aux send jumpered to post fader) or 
use them as a monitor output, after you jumper the Aux send in the channels to pre fader. 
FOLLOW PHONES
This switch is an input selector for the STUDIO output.  Instead of listening to the main 
outputs, it allows the user to listen to the phones output.  This feature is used by announcers and DJ’s that do not want to use headphones all the time.
Mute by Mic
This latching switch (when pushed down) allows control signals (mic on) coming from 
the DJ mic to mute the CRM speakers.  
This is to avoid signal feedback in the studio area and keeps the DJ’s sound clear. At the 
same time a relay is activated which is connected to the Red Light output connector on 
the back of the master section.
ANNOUNCER
The AIRENCE has a separate Announcer output that normally follows the Program prefader left and right signals, but in case a guest wants to hear a caller switching to Follow 
Phones enables him or her to listen tot the CUE system. 
FOLLOW PHONES
This switch is an input selector for the announcer output.  Instead of listening to the 
main outputs, it allows the user to listen to the phones output.  This feature is used by 
announcers and DJ’s that do not want to use headphones all the time. Also the CUE 
communication bus can be accessed to communicate with anyone connected to it.
 
CRM SECTION (Control Room Monitor)
The CRM control is fed by the master outputs pre (before) the masterfaders. 
This can be used as an extra stereo output for recording or a sound system in which 
you do not want the master faders to change the out-going signal.
Mute by Mic
This latching switch (when pushed down) allows control signals (mic on) coming from 
the DJ mic to mute the CRM monitor speakers. This is to avoid signal feedback in the 
control room and keeps the DJ’s sound clear. At the same time a relay is activated which 
is connected to the Red Light output connector. A jumper in the mic channel needs to 
be set to allow this control signal to Mute the Control Room Monitors.
FOLLOW PHONES
This switch is an input selector for the CRM output.  Instead of listening to the main outputs, it allows the user to listen to the 
phones output.  This feature is used by announcers and DJ’s that do not want to use headphones.
BALANCE
The balance knob controls the balance between the main stereo Program output and the stereo Cue signal when selected. 
With the balance control anywhere between Cue and L/R you always have control over the main output signal even when a Cue 
switch is activated.
Note: The split switch de-activates the balance control.
SPLIT
When the split function is activated the following listening situation is created. The left side of the phones output gives the 
summed Cue signal and the right output gives the summed left/right signal (pre fader). With the SPLIT switch activated, the balance control has no influence on the configuration any longer.
 

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  21
TALK BACK
The Talk back circuit has a built in electret microphone with routing to most of the outputs. By selecting one or more of the routing switches, you can communicate to the outputs SUB/AUX/STUDIO and Announcer. 
The Talk back level is independent of settings of the master controls and Announcer 
outputs. An exception is the AUX output, here the Talk back level is also dependant 
upon the master level setting of the AUX master.The Talk back switch has a momentary action to avoid being in the talk back mode when not wanted. 
As can be seen in the Telco module there is a Talkback switch routing the built in Electret mic directly to the caller. If an announcer who wants to talk to the caller and is 
not sitting in front of the mixing consoles, he can use his Presenters Mic, the engineer 
activates both the Announcers mic channel’s CUE and the caller’s CUE and now both 
can talk with each other. 
MASTER FADERS
The AIRENCE master faders are 100mm K-Alps faders controlling both left and right 
signals individually to compensate for imbalances in the left & right audio signals. 
They are conveniently placed close to each other to control both levels with one finger and still be able to balance uneven signals by hand.
PHONES
The phones output (located on the front panel) automatically switches between 
Main Program outputs and CUE from any input module or 
from the Master 
section. Normally the left/right output is heard until a Cue 
switch is activated 
from anywhere in the console. By pressing a CUE switch, 
you will hear the 
associated signal rather than the left/right signal in the PHONES. The led bar switches 
accordingly with this action.  
We advise you to use headphones with an input impedance NO LOWER THAN 400 
Ohms to avoid mismatch or distortion.  An 8-32 Ohm set of headphones will produce 
distortion when cranking up the level of the AIRENCE to high due to the fact that the 
impedance load is too low.  If you must use 8-32 ohm phones, a small power amp 
should be used to power the phones. It is a load equivalent to the load that loudspeakers normally present to power amps. The AIRENCE has no power-amp built in, 
sorry.
NONSTOP
The Non Stop switch is a very convenient function when you want to use your mixer 
while NON STOP on-air.
By activating this switch a by you pre selected USB channel (1,2,3 or 4) sends its signal 
directly to the main XLR outputs, making your mixer completely free for production.
A CUE switch let’s you listen to what you’re broadcasting directly out of your Play-out 
system.
Two Trimmers are available to even out any level differences between NON stop 
mode and On-Air mode,
METERING
Part of the total AIRENCE package is a software meter application and clock as seen below. All data are 
transported over the single USB 2.0 connection. An 
accurate NTP clock time is taken from  the Internet.
Be sure to have access to the Internet.
The big left meter always shows the Program 
output, the other big meter shows the SUB output 
level and the smaller meter on the right hand side 
follows every signal selected by the CRM section.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  22
MASTER BACKPANEL CONNECTORS
The master connector panel houses 18 RCA/Cinch connectors, 2 jack sockets, and 2 male XLR connectors.  
There are two power supply connectors, USB connector and the SUB-D type connector to connect a slave unit to the main unit.
From right to left we will describe the functions and features of the master connector panel.
AUX SEND
The aux outputs are on two RCA Cinch connectors with the signal coming from the aux send 
controls in the channels. 
The level is +6 dBu (1.55 volt). 
You can connect the inputs of reverbs from 
these outputs (with Aux send jumpered to post 
fader) or use them as a monitor output, after 
you jumper the Aux send in the channels to pre 
fader.
CRM SEND
The CRM (Control Room Monitor) outputs 
are on two RCA Cinch connectors carrying the 
signal coming from the CRM volume potentiometer on the front panel and its associated source selection. The level is +6 dBu (1.55 volt). 
You can connect the inputs of Active monitors to Cinch connectors.
PROGRAM SEND
The PROG (Program) outputs are on two RCA Cinch connectors carrying the same signal as is on the Master left right XLR’s and 
stays there also when the NON STOP ON-AIR switch is activated. Then the main XLR outputs carry the USB signal from one of the 
USB inputs. 
This non switched output can be used for recording when the console is in its NON STOP mode. The Prog output connectors are 
left and right outputs for connecting the inputs of a stereo  audio  recorder or any other analog or digital device. Output level is 
-10dBv (-7.8dBu / 300mV), the signal is post master fader.
AUX RETURN
The Aux return connectors are controlled by the Aux return control on the master section.  The signal is connected directly to the 
master main mix busses. You can connect reverb returns or other stereo signals without using any input modules. The input level 
should be at least -10dBV.
EXT(ERNAL) INPUTS
These inputs are for instance intended to return stereo ON-AIR signal in the monitor section for checking live On-AIR signals.
The input level should be at least -10dBV.
CUE SEND
The CUE outputs are on two RCA Cinch connectors with the signal coming from the CUE mix busses to be send to a separate CUE 
loudspeaker. 
The level is +0 dBu (0.775 volt). 
STUDIO LEFT RIGHT
The studio outputs are on two RCA Cinch connectors carrying the signal coming from the studio volume potentiometer on the 
front panel and its associated source selection. The level is +6 dBu (1.55 volt). 
You can connect the inputs of Active monitors to these Cinch connectors.
RECORD OUT
The Record Out cinch connectors normally send out the Program-Pre master fader signals, unless its source selection is switched 
to from SUB or from AUX. Output level is -10dBV (-7.8dBu / 300mV)
SUB OUTPUTS
The SUB outputs are on two RCA Cinch connectors carrying the signal coming from the SUB summing amps. 
This non switched output can be used for recording when the console is in its NON STOP mode, or for sending out channel selected signals.
The level is dependant upon the SUB master volume control and can be listen to post SUB master by way of the CUE push button.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  23
ANNOUNCER OUTPUT
The Announcer output is on a Stereo jack connector and carries the signal coming from the Program Announcer amps. 
This output can be used for sending signal to the announcer in the Studio. Normally this output carries the main program signal 
unless the follow phones push button is activated, then the announcer can be linked to Cue signals for communication with DJ’s 
and or Callers.
The level is dependant upon the Announcer master volume control and is able to drive 400 Ohm headphones as a minimum 
impredance.
If more headphones need to be connect a separate headphone amp is a solution.
MIC ON
Directly beneath the SUB cinch connectors is a stereo jack socket (Mic On) that can control a red light indicator. This stereo jack is 
connected to a change over relay. This relay is capable of controlling external Red light circuits as long as it doesn’t take a higher 
voltage than 24 volt and the current doesn’t exceed 50 mA! Individual channels can be OFF jumpered from this buss.
NEVER CONNECT 115/230 AC VOLTAGE TO THIS JACK!!
The C.C. (Center Contact) of the internal relay is connected to the Tip of the stereo jack. 
The N.O. (Normally Open) contact is connected to the ring of the jack.
The N.C. (Normally Closed) contact is connected to the “sleeve or ground” of the jack.
AIRENCE-USB RED LIGHT / START EXAMPLES
Start / Mic-On  Jack
Function OPTO COUPLER
Comment
Tip
 
Switch Contact
Max. 24V, 50mA.
By jumper selection Pulse or Continuously
Ring
Switch Contact
Sleeve
 
Not Connected
Our D&R ON-AIR warning light (pictured at the left) can be connected directly to the 
ON-AIR jack socket (or Start jack in the TElco modules) between tip and ring by way of 
a simple 2 wire connection.
The ON-AIR led light has its own external power adapter.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  24
MASTER OUTPUTS
The master outputs are 3 pin male XLR connectors and are electronically balanced and can be connected to an input of a power 
amp, professional recorder or On-Air processor. The output level is +6 dBu (1.55 volt).
POWER CONNECTOR
These two 5 pin XLR connectors accept external 36 volt 5A switched low energy power supplies that are part of the delivery.
DO NOT USE ANY OTHER POWER SUPPLY THEN THIS ONE!!!
Your AIRENCE can accept voltages between 90 AND 230 volts at 50/60Hz.
The main unit of the AIRENCE works perfectly on one external power supply unit, but incase redundancy is requested, a second 
unit can be connected to the second power XLR connector. If one fails the other takes over.
SUB-D CONNECTOR TO SLAVE UNITS
The AIRENCE has a Sub-D connector where you can connect an input slave unit with 6 triple inputs to extend the number of 
inputs of your system. All (ON-AIR) and CUE control signals are  sent also through this low impedance module link.
And... there is no limit to the number of extender units that can be connected, see it this way. The first extender unit plugs into 
the main unit and the second Extender unit plugs into the first Extender unit and so on if more input channels are needed.
OPTIONAL AES/EBU OUTPUT
It is possible to order an optional digital AES output.
In some versions of the AIRENCE-USB we use the second redundant Power supply connector for that purpose.
In other versions there is a third 3 pole XLR left of the Redundant 5 pole connector.
Default the AES is set to the following values.
HEADROOM: -20dBFS (with jumper) No jumper means -9dBFS
Sample Rate: 48kHz (with jumper) No jumper means 96kHz

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  25
SET-UP ROUTINES MODULE 1-4
•	
Connect a power-amp, recorder, or transmitter to the Master left/right main outputs.
•	
Connect a high impedance (NOT BELOW 400 Ohm) headphone to the “phones” jack socket on the master section. 
•	
Connect a microphone or line level equipment. 
•	
Now, connect turntables, CD players, and jingle machines.
•	
Connect a red light indicator to the master section when there is a need for it.
•	
The Studio and Announcer outputs can feed high impedance (400 ohms and above) stereo headphones directly.
•	
•	
Now with everything connected, follow the adjustment procedure.
•	
Note; for mikes, only activate the grey Mic switch, for line level, leave this switch up and select line in the up position of the 
upper switch in the module.
•	
Put on your headphones and turn the headphone volume control to the “12 o’clock” position.
•	
Set all the gain-controls and the master faders to its minimum. 
•	
Set all equalizer-controls to the “12 o’clock” position.
•	
All push button-switches should be in the up position, except for the Prog routing switches in the modules.
•	
Connect your external power supply and connect this supply to the mains voltage, the first LED in the LEDbars should be on.
SETTING UP AN INPUT CHANNEL
Push the CUE switch in a channel that is connected to a source.  
Now slowly turn the GAIN control clockwise until you hear and see the input signal on the LED bars in the master section. 
You can change the input sound by adjusting the equalizer-section.  
If you adjust the equalization, once again check the level on the led bar, because  
increasing specific parts of the frequency spectrum can easily add more gain to the signal.
If you can’t get enough gain (when you have a  low sensitivity dynamic microphone) the trimmer on the 2 o’clock position above 
the GAIN control knob could be trimmed for more or less gain.
The LEDbar indication should be between -6 dB and  +6 dB to get a proper level on amplifiers or recording devices.
The LEDbar is a VU meter indicating the absolute level that enters the console. 
It is calibrated to indicate 0 dB on the scale corresponding with a +6 dBu output level.
Release the CUE switch so the led bar can now read the output signal again.
Now push the ON button to connect the input signal to the fader. 
Now move the fader to the “10” position screened alongside the channel faders and turn up the master fader to the “0” position. 
Further volume adjustments can be made on the equipment your signal is send to, such as power-amps or transmitters.
The other inputs are similarly adjusted, using the “CUE” switches to (pre fade) listen to the connected sources. 
Use the input gain for regular gain adjustment and the trimmer for fine adjustments to create a convenient gain range to work 
with.
Be carefully not to place the AIRENCE near heavy power transformers such as power amps. 
Although the AIRENCE is constructed using a thick metal frame, this could cause hum.
SETTING UP THE USB  MODULES
Input modules 1 to 4 are also capable of accepting stereo USB 
signals from a PC where you have play-out software running.
To be able to set up a connection with your PC, use a standard USB 
cable from a local computer shop. (See picture).
When connecting the AIRENCE to your computer, the computer 
(PC or Mac) will recognize the 
AIRENCE as new hardware and will establish a connection to any 
audio programs needing audio hardware.
Also all 4 stereo channels will be automatically put in a natural 
sequence of 1 to 4.
After establishing a connection, there is no need to download 
drivers or performing complicated setup routines, just plug in the 
USB cable to your Windows or Mac computer and start tracking/
playing!
If you first want to know more about USB try this link 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Audio_Stream_Input/Output 
If you are already familiar with digital audio recording, the latest 
versions of Kristal Audio Engine and Audacity are available free of 
charge via the Internet. Use this link http://www.asio4all.com/ for 
third party downloads.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  26
 SETTING UP THE TELCO MODULES
Connect the two wires of the telephone line’s wall connector to the RJ-11 
connector labelled wall (LINE) and connect the telephone unit (the one 
that has a dialer and handset) to the RJ-11 connector labelled PHONE. Note that to originate calls, a 
local phone must be connected to the AIRENCE, so 
you are able to dial a number.
Once the dialed person has taken the call you can 
talk to him via the handset and inform him that he 
will be in the broadcast soon. You do this by pushing the connect button in the TELCO module. if you now want to hear him or her 
again in the mixer push the CUE button in the same channel you have pushed the 
Connect button and listen to the Cue signal through the CRM (follow phones active) 
or via your headphone output. If you want some else to talk to him or her also prior 
to the broadcast push any CUE button and communication is established.
Now the internal hybrid is interfaced (fully balanced) between your telephone appliance and its connection to the outside world. The hybrid can now split the send 
and return signals. 
Position both Telco send and gain potentiometers in the 12 o’clock positions. 
If a local phone is connected, originate a call to a remote site (someone’s phone). 
If no local phone is present, someone at a remote site must call you. 
When a call comes in, the red RING LED (positioned between the CUE and ON switches) lights up each time 
the phone rings. The line is picked up by pushing the CONN button. 
If you want to hear the caller, press in the same channel the CUE button to listen to the incoming call. 
Adjust the Gain control to get a good input level from the telephone line.
To be able to talk to the caller press the TB (Talkback) button and… talk to him or use another MIC input of 
the mixer and push the CUE there too. Adjust the Telco send potentiometer to increase or decrease the outgoing level to the caller.
Note: This is all happening outside the broadcast.
If all is OK and both parties know what to do, you can press the ON switch and fade up the caller ON-AIR, or, 
put the fader in its “0 or 10” position and activate the ON switch to put the caller on-air.
Before going “live” with your caller, you will need to adjust the optimum RC balance to create the best 
separation of in and outgoing signals to the telephone line, otherwise your listeners will be presented with 
bad quality audio and your own voice will be influenced by crosstalk of your own signal feeding en returning 
from the Hybrid. These adjustments are only required once when installing the AIRENCE.
To achieve the optimum attenuation, you must adjust the C and R balance first.
This is how it is performed:
1.	
Check if the Telephone connection is established and all connections to the mixing console are correctly 
wired.
2.	
Send an audio signal to the telephone line by activating another module, for example, a CD player.
3.	
Now activate the CUE button of the TELCO module where the telephone line is connected. 
4.	
You will faintly hear the send signal coming out of the mixing console.
5.	
Adjust the R-Balance for minimum feed through of the mixers send signal.
6.	
Listen now which switch position of the C-balance gives a further reduction of the return signal.
7.	
Maybe it is good to re-adjust the R-balance after having selected another switch position.
8.	
Repeat steps 5 and 6 until no further improvement is achieved for this telephone line.
9.	
Note: If you use the mixer in different locations this procedure must be done again.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  27
Below is an explanation for Germany Phone systems where different telephone connectors are used.
Eingang und Ausgang Telefonhybrid Module (RJ11): 	
Pin I	
: nicht belegt 
Pin 2	
: Amt Leitung A 
Pin 3	
: Amt Leitung B
Pin 4	
: nicht belegt
Anschluss Telefon (RJ11): 
Pin I	
: nicht belegt 
Pin 2	
: nicht belegt 
Pin 3	
: Amt Leitung A 
Pin 4	
: Amt Leitung B 
Pin 5	
: nicht belegt 
Pin 6	
: nicht belegt, 
oder bei Nichtfunktion: 
Pin I	
: nicht belegt 
Pin 2	
: Amt Leitung B 
Pin 3	
: nicht belegt 
Pin 4	
: nicht belegt 
Pin 5	
: Amt Leitung A 
Pin 6	
: nicht belegt
Ein Verbindungskabel ist durch ein Fachmann entsprechend anzupassen!
CONNECTION WIRING OF BOTH (Wall) LINE and PHONE RJ-11 CONNECTORS
PHONE/WALL RJ-11
FUNCTION
CONNECTION
Pin 1
n.c.
Pin 2
A (telephone line)
In/out
Pin 3
B (telephone line)
In/out
Pin 4
n.c.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  28
EXTENDER TRIPLE INPUT MODULES 1-6
The input modules switches & controls of the main AIRENCE-EXTENDER mixer have the following functions:
Each of Modules 1 thru 6 has three selectable inputs. The three types of inputs consist of a Mic input a stereo 
line input and a second Stereo LIne input. In the Mic switch position, the module is a normal mono module. 
When the Mic is switched out, you have the choice of Line A or Line B stereo inputs which allows for the 
module to become a stereo module with both left & right signals to feed the PROGRAM and or SUB stereo mix 
busses. 
GAIN
With the gain control (the first control knob below the modules number), the source input level can be adjusted to the required internal mixer level. This control adjusts both the Mic input and the stereo Line/Line inputs 
with the same control depending on the switch positions. Mic gain can be more precisely controlled with the 
small trimmer positioned just above the High EQ control. A small flat screwdriver is needed.
Try it in this way, if you cannot achieve enough Mic gain when the gain control is fully turned clockwise, only 
then you slowly turn to the right to increase the gain to the desired level. Also a mic only low cut filter is 
built in but this can only be reached/set when the bottom of the console is removed. There are more jumper 
settings in the console, so we advice to make a (jumper)plan for your situation and then do all the internal 
jumper settings in one go.
 
STEREO LINE/LINE
The stereo line input is a high impedance input ( >10 kOhm) for connecting the stereo line level outputs of 
devices such as CD players/MP3 players etc. The  second Line B input can accept a D&R stereo Phono Pre-amp 
with a RIAA equalizer curve to accept turntable pick ups. This RIAA correction amp can be purchased in  our 
D&R webshop.
MIC
The Mic input has a balanced XLR input connector with 48 volt phantom powering for condenser mikes. The 
Mic-pre circuitry uses the latest technology studio-class components as used in high end recording consoles, 
we use the That 1510 Mic-pre which is highly acclaimed for its low noise/distortion and transparent audio. 
The low-noise design and excellent phase spec that D&R is known for is integrated throughout the AIRENCEUSB which results in phase coherent signal path. Using balanced microphones & cables allows for the quietest 
and high quality audio signals throughout your AIRENCE-USB mixer. You can use standard balanced Mic cables 
available at any pro audio dealer or music store. The AIRENCE-USB uses chassis-mount female XLR type Mic 
input connectors. Any standard pro audio Mic cable will have the mating male XLR connector. 
 
EQUALIZER
Each module has a stereo three band equalizer to control the high, mid, and low frequencies individually. The 
D&R designers used carefully chosen frequencies in the equalizer circuitry to enhance the Mic input as well as 
the stereo A & B line inputs.
SUB
This switch routes the post Fader signal directly to the SUB buss, this SUB buss can be used to make a sub mix 
for recording or any other creative proces.
PROG(RAM)
This switch routes the post Fader signal directly to the PROGRAM buss. This PROGRAM signal is directly routed 
to the main outputs of ther mixer via the master faders.
AUX SEND
The next control is a stereo Aux send that sends stereo source signals to the stereo Aux send buss Master (or 
SUB buss) and then to the output connectors on the Master back panel. The stereo Aux send is for external 
effects such as reverb, echo or headphone amplifiers. 
CUE
Below the AUX SEND is the stereo CUE switch (Pre Fade Listening), this switch allows you to check the signal before you raise 
your channel fader up and mix it with other signals in the mixer. Another smart function is that this CUE bus can be used for communication.  
If you push a DJ’s Cue (let’s say channel one) and if you then push the Telco Cue, the DJ as well as the caller can hear each other 
outside the broadcast and you sitting behind the desk as well. Levels need to be carefully set to avoid feedback and overdrive of 
circuits.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  29
ON
The ON switch is used to activate the module and generate a start signal for turntables, CD players, and 
jingle or cart machines. This switch sends out a momentary pulse or shortens continuously two pins of the 
Start connector on the back panel of the console. A jumper setting on ther PCB let’s you choose between 
pulse and continuously.   
FADER
Final control is the high quality, 100 mm long throw K-Alps stereo channel fader with integrated fader start 
switch. At the beginning of the fader movement you will feel an integrated start switch that is activated 
when you bring up the fader. This switch activates the start circuitry that is connected to the Start Connector 
on the module back panel as described earlier. If the Mute-Act(ive) switch in the master section is activated, 
positioned close to the CRM volume knob and there is also one close to the Studio volume knob, the control 
room level (or Studio level) will be dimmed by 20dB in case in the input module Mic is selected. At the same 
time a USB HID (Human Interface Device) signal is sent to the USB bus for controlling a function in your playout software. 
On the pcb there is a jumper setting where you can select if you want and extra 10dB of fader gain. Then  
the unity gain position will be at the -10dB position. If you are a person that sweeps the fader fully up and 
down, then do not select the extra fader gain of 10dB and choose for a unity gain position in the fully open 
position of the fader. A jumper setting page will be shown further in this manual to customize your AIRENCE 
to your needs.
INPUT CONNECTORS 1-6 
On the back of your AIRENCE-EXTENDER modules 1 to 6 you will find the following seven connectors.
Two unbalanced line A input RCA Cinch connectors (stereo input) for connecting CD players or any play-back 
devices such as cart machines, cassette players, or iPods. Any line level equipment can be connected here. 
The level can be set using the gain control to match most source levels.
The left RCA Cinch connector is the left input and the right RCA Cinch connector is the right input.  
The shield is to be connected to the ground or case of the RCA Cinch connector.
The Two unbalanced line B input RCA Cinch connectors (stereo inputs) are a second stereo input in this 
module to connect even more line level equipment to.
The START switch has two active connections to be wired. The tip and ring are shorted when the ON switch 
or fader switch is activated. Once you have done this, you can start a turntable or other devise with the ON 
switch via the START connector on the back panel.  
The START switches quick start turntables through the remote jack by a continuous contact action at the 
back of the mixer.  If your turntable only needs a pulse to start, ask your dealer to modify the internal circuitry to change it to a momentary action, so it can be used as a pulse start switch. 
*NEVER CONNECT THE MAINS TO THIS REMOTE-JACK*
Connections on the START connector can only be made with a maximum of 24 Volts by 50 mA.  
Please contact your dealer in case of doubt.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  30
INSERT
This ring/tip/sleeve stereo jack socket let’s you insert signal processors such as compressors/gates or special voice processing 
units to improve your voice to sound like the ultimate announcer/D.J.  
The Ring of the stereo jack sends the channel signal and the Tip accepts the return signal.
On the right you see the type of cable you need when your processor has jack in and outputs. Connect the tip from the stereo 
cable to the tip of one of the mono jacks and the ring of the stereo cable to the tip of the other mono jack.
Now insert the stereo jack into the AIRENCE’s insert and connect the mono jack that produces a hum when the tip is touched by 
your finger (and the related channel fader is open) into the processors output. The other mono jack should be inserted into the 
processors input.  
In case your processor has XLR inputs connect the tip of the stereo jack to pin 2 of the Female XLR and short pin 1  and 3 with 
each other and connect to ground (sleeve), this also goes for the other  Male XLR, connect the ring of the stereo jack (which 
sends signals) to a male XLR pin2. Short here pin 1 and 3 and solder to ground (sleeve). This has to be done because the insert is 
not balanced. 
See below the cable type you need.
MIC
The Mic input is a professional balanced input circuit with 48 volt phantom powering for condenser mikes which deliver studioclass microphone quality to your announcer/DJ channel.  
JUMPER SETTINGS FOR EXTENDER CHANNELS

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  31
SPECIAL OPTIONS FOR EXTENDER MODULES 1 - 6 (PCB AIRENCE-1)
   PCB Location
JUMPERS
DEFAULT
DESCRIPTION
J9
Phantom ON
48 volt phantom power on/off via Jumper J9.
J3 
Low cut ON
Low cut filter on Mic input done by shorting all 
4 pins on Jumper J3. 
Removal of both jumpers gives no low cut function
J5/J7
0dB
Fader gain can be set to change the post fader 
gain from 0db to +10dB
(you need to do this for both left and right signals!)
J6/J16
POST
Stereo Aux send pre or post selectable via 
Jumper J6/J16 
J5
Continuously
Pulse/Continuously Jumper J17 to change the 
start pulse from latching (continuously) to 
pulse.
J10
MIC ON
ON select
This J10 jumper allows you to mute the CRM 
speakers or the Studio speakers.
1=CRM mute (as pictured) and 2 is Studio mute 
(only when a Mic is activated)
Default factory setting is (2) Studio Speaker 
mute active.  

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  32
SPECIAL OPTIONS FOR EXTENDER MODULES 1 - 6 (PCB AIRENCE-1)
   PCB Location
JUMPERS
DEFAULT
DESCRIPTION
J15
J11
J18
Faderstart 
or 
Mic Remote
These 3 jumpers change the standard remote 
jack on the back of the extender unit from 
Fader Start control jack into Studio (Mic) Remote jack. The default setting is Fader start.
When all three jumpers are jumpered to the 
right then the remote jack can be connected 
to an optional Studio Remote unit.
The above pictured (optional) Studio Remote can be connected to the AIRENCE Extender only to provide communication from the Presenter to the Studio room with the following possibilities.
1.  Switch 1 (Comm) 
When pressed the Mic input of the associate channel will be switched from Prog, Sub or Aux 
to the Cue buss to be able to communicate with the technician. 
1. Switch 2 (Cough)	
When pressed the Mic input of the associate channel will be muted, when the presenter need to Cough 
or sneeze.
3) Rotary knob
Adjusts the Headphone volume
4) Jack
Stereo Headphone output
5) Audio In
The audio input for the Headphone amplifier. Connect with the Announcer output of the Airence mixer.
6) Audio Out	
Direct feed trough of the Audio input. To be connected to the next studio remote
7) Remote S1/S2
Switching contacts 1 and 2 connected to the remote jack of the mixer.
4 
3 
1 
2 
 
 6
 5
7

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  33
Control Module & USB channel controls
User Manual Control Section V 1.00
 
D&R Electronica BV, Rijnkade 15B, 1382GS Weesp, The Netherlands
Phone: +31 (0)294-418014, Fax: +31 (0)294-416987, Website: http://www.d-r.nl, E-mail: mail@d-r.nl

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  34
Contents
•	
Introduction		
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
page 31
•	
Why a control module?	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
•	
USB channel controls	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
page 32
•	
How does it work?	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
•	
Communication Interface Update rate	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
•	
Controlling your software application	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
page 33
•	
Airence virtual keyboard mapper	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
page 34
•	
Control signals Setting up your configuration	
	
	
	
	
	
	
•	
Play out plug-ins Quick function Learn	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
page 36
•	
Configuration viewer	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
page 38
•	
Let’s get connected	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
•	
Presets Store preset	
•	
Recall preset		
	
	
	
	
	
	
•	
Settings	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
•	
Airence USB HID Control Protocol	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
page 39
•	
Introduction		
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
•	
Message format	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
page 40
•	
Command byte	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
•	
Messages	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
•	
Write	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
•	
Request	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
•	
Response	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
page 41	
•	
Events	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
page 31

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  35
Introduction
Besides the audio channels the Airence mixer is equipped with a control section. This control section is located at the right of 
the mixer and consists of 24 illuminated switches and a rotary encoder with push switch. The switches are able to illuminate red, 
green, and yellow to indicate various conditions. Each switch contains a label which can be customized to customer needs.
Why a control module?
A frequently desire in the broadcast world is to control specific play-out software by an external hardware device since the user 
prefer to have direct and accurate control over the controlled application. In order to be able to control such a software application from unlike mouse or keyboard, one normally needs an external hardware device which is user friendly to operate and is 
able to communicate with the relevant application.
 
The Airence mixer benefits from an integrated control module whereby investments in external equipment are unnecessary.  
The control section provides a sufficient number of switches to control any play out software, for example starting and stopping 
jingle players. With the rotary encoder at the top one is able to scroll through and select parameters. 
Figure 1. Airence Control Module

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  36
USB channel controls
Furthermore, the fader start, on and cue signals of the four available USB channels in the Airence mixer could also be used to 
trigger or control any software application. In combination with the control module the Airence mixer provides a flexible all-inone solution to manage and control specific play out systems.
Figure 2. USB Channel Controls
                                     
How does it work? 
Communication Interface
The present USB bus on the Airence mixer is used as the interface to transfer all the control signals to the PC. In order to keep 
things simple the HID (Human Interface Device) protocol is used for communication between the Airence mixer and PC.  
On top of the HID protocol there is specific control protocol developed at D&R which is discussed in depth in the chapter 
“Airence USB HID Control Protocol” for those who wants to go “deeper”.
Update rate
When a state change of a control signal (switch, fader, encoder) occurs, the current state of all the controls are transmitted to 
the PC. Such a state change of a control signal is called an event. The state of a switch can be pressed or released. In case of an 
encoder the additional states besides the pressed and released ones when pushing the encoder (switch function), are increments  
or decrements when turning. 

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  37
Controlling your software application
In order to be able to control a software application (i.e. play out software) with the Airence control signals (control module / 
USB channel controls), one can choose one of the two available methodologies as can be seen in the figure below. 
The first method is most applicable for software developers of the controlled application, who are able to integrate the Airence 
USB HID Control Protocol in their application. For more information about the protocol refer to the Airence USB HID Control Protocol chapter at the end of this document.
The second method uses a ‘mapper-application’ in between the HID messages and the controlled application and is created for 
the end user. The Virtual Keyboard Mapper maps the control signals coming from the Airence mixer to standard keyboard keystrokes. In such a way pressing a switch on the control module will lead to a customized keystroke which controls a specific function inside the controlled application (play out software) for example. 
• 
Method 1 (developer):	
- Direct access to control messages   
	- Full duplex: read control signals / control LED’s inside the switches 	
	- Programming is necessary to integrate the protocol in the application
• 
Method 2 (end user):	
- Easy to use (No programming for integration in application needed)
	- Half duplex: read control signals
	- Quick started using the Virtual Keyboard Mapper features
Figure 3. Airence control signal flow

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  38
Airence virtual keyboard mapper
The Airence virtual keyboard mapper is a software application which maps incoming control signals from the Airence mixer to 
keystrokes by creating a virtual keyboard on a windows machine. Since the mapper application behaves like a real keyboard it is 
able to control any software application which is controllable by a keyboard. Most software applications have attached keystrokes 
to file menu items or application specific functions. All the incoming control signals from the Airence mixer can be individually 
mapped to such predefined keystrokes. 
Figure 4. Airence virtual keyboard mapper, Windows-based application 
Control signals
In total there are 39 control signals coming from the Airence mixer which can be mapped to keystrokes using the Airence virtual 
keyboard mapper application. These 39 control signals are divided into the Control Module signals and USB Channel controls. 
Control Module:
 Switches 1..24 
 Encoder switch 
 Encoder increment 
 Encoder decrement
USB Channel Controls:
 Cue (4x)
 On (4x)
 Faderstart (4x)
Each control signal may generate a press or release event (except the encoder) which can in turn trigger two separate keystrokes. Especially for the USB Channel Controls (latching switches) it can be useful to control two functions when pressing(P) or 
releasing(R) the switch. For example:
USB1 ON (P) Ctrl+Alt+F1 (function X in controlled application) 
USB1 ON (R) Ctrl+Alt+F2 (function Y in controlled application)

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  39
Setting up your configuration
The Airence virtual keyboard mapper application can be split up in an configuration editor and configuration viewer section as 
can be seen in the figure above. In the configuration editor section one is able to attach keystrokes to the control signals. To do 
so, clicking on one of the switches, encoder or faders opens up a keystroke configuration editor window where the configuration 
of the relevant control signal can be done. Configuring another control signal can be achieved by selecting one from the Source 
Select selection box, or by clicking on the relevant control signal on the main window. 
Figure 5. Editor window for mapping control signals to keystrokes
Source Select
At the top of this window one can see a selection box where the control signals are listed under Source Select. When clicking on 
one of the control signals at the main window the Keystroke configuration editor automatically selects this control signal (source) 
in the selection box.  All settings in this window are related to the selected source. 
Source Action
In the two action field groups the press and release events of a control signal can be configured. If there is a play out plug-in 
selected at the main window you can choose from predefined functions of that specific play out software. When selecting one 
of those functions the remaining fields will be filled in automatically. In such a way that you don’t have to worry about the keystroke and can focus on mapping a control signal to a play out function. However, manual changes in the settings after selecting a 
predefined play out function is always possible. 
When no play out plug-in is selected you are not able to select a play out function from the list and therefore it is necessary to fill 
in the fields manually. A maximum of three keys can be configured to construct a keystroke.  
Start with configuring Key 1 upwards if more than one key is included in the keystroke. The keystroke action can be inverted if 
required. Finally there is a field to give the action a meaningful name . The reset button resets the entire configuration for the 
selected source. The settings will be stored after pressing the apply button. 

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  40
Play out plug-ins
An play out plug-in is a set of function descriptions of a specific software application (play out software) which are mapped to 
keystrokes. A plug-in is represented as a standard XML-file which can be seen in the figure below. There is a plug-in folder  
PLUGINS created in the installation directory during setup where the plug-ins are located or has to be placed when creating one. 
Present plug-ins in this folder are loaded when Virtual Keyboard Mapper is starting up. 
The advantage of using plug-ins will be the ease of mapping a control signal to a function. You don’t need to worry about the 
underlying keystroke of a relevant function since selecting a function from the Keystroke Configuration Editor will automatically 
fill in the corresponding keystroke. These keystrokes are fetched from the plug-in file.    
Figure 6. Example of playout plugin file
Create a plug-in
A plug-in is specific for each play out software. If the used play out software is not available as a plug in you need to create the 
plug-in yourself. Since the plug-ins are represented in the XML format (which is readable for machine as well as human beings)  
it is not that hard to create one. It is advisable to use another plug-in as template and modify that file.  
In the above figure a basic example plug-in file is shown with two functions. If more functions are needed simple copy and paste 
a function block (line 9 – 16). 
The plug-in starts always with a block of plug-in information (name, vendor, version, nfunctions). The nfunctions element contains the number of functions which are included in the plug-in. After the plug-in information the functions are listed beneath 
each other. In the description field the name of the function needs to be filled in. This name will be used later on in the Keystroke 
Configuration Editor to choose a function from the list.  
Finally, there is a keystroke element which contains three other elements key1, key2, and key3 respectively. These last three elements contain together the keystroke to perform when the function needs to be executed. A keystroke can consist of a maximum 
of three keys. Each key element can be filled with a ID key value between 0 and 91. 
The ID value represent a key on the keyboard which can be found in the table in the figure on the next page.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  41
Figure 7. Keyboard keys vs. ID
Quick function Learn
The Quick Function Learn is a feature to map control signals to play-out functions rapidly. First you have to select a play out  
plug-in before the quick function learn can be used. If the play out plug-in is loaded correctly, the loaded functions are listed in 
the Quick Function Learn box. 
Figure 8. Play out plug-in required for using the Quick Function Learn
Select one of the available functions from the Quick Function Learn box and press the Learn button. The window as seen in the 
figure below will show up and waits for a control signal event coming from the Airence mixer. If a control signal is received the 
selected function is immediately mapped to this control signal.  
Figure 9. Quick function learner waiting for response

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  42
Configuration viewer
In the configuration viewer section an overview of the entire configuration can be seen. All the pressed and released events of 
the control signals are shown in the Virtual Keyboard Mapping area. In order to get a clear overview the view section is divided 
into four pages:
 Control Module (Pressed)
 Control Module (Released)
 USB Channels (Pressed)
 USB Channels (Released)
 
Selecting one of the four pages is done by the radio buttons in the Source Group Selection and Source Action boxes which are 
located above the configuration viewer section.
Figure 10. Page selection view
Let’s get connected
When done with setting up the configuration the Virtual Keyboard Mapper application is ready to receive changes of the control 
signals from the Airence mixer. To do so, you have to press the START button in the Service box. If the application is able to connect to the Airence mixer the label on the button would change into STOP and the firmware revision of the mixer is shown.  
The indicator near the button indicates incoming messages. Pressing the STOP button will stop the service and disconnect the 
Airence mixer. 
When a control signal is received and is mapped to a keystroke, this keystroke will be executed in real time. To let the executed 
keystroke trigger a function in a software application you have to take care of giving this application Priority. An application is 
only able to receive input when it currently has the highest priority in your screen activities.  
          
Figure 7a. Disconnected                                          Figure 7b. Connected  
Presets
A preset is a backup of the entire configuration of the control signals with their mapped keystrokes. Presets can be useful when 
you want to recall or store a complete configuration for specific play out software. Presets are represented as .akp files (Airence 
Keyboard Preset). 
Store preset
Storing the current configuration as a preset can be done by clicking on File->Save, or File->Save as. 
 
Recall preset 
Recalling a stored preset can be done by clicking on File->Open and selecting the desired preset.
 
Settings
Under Settings->Presets you can find the preset settings. A configuration window is shown whereby the default preset directory 
and the startup preset can be configured.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  43
HID Control Protocol for software engineers
 
Introduction
This chapter describes the protocol which is used to communicate with the control section and the USB channel controls of the 
Airence mixer. For the communication between the PC (host) and Airence (device) the USB generic HID (Human Interface Device) 
class protocol is used. HID devices are identified by their PID and VID. For the Airence the PID=0x2402, and the VID=0x03EB.   
On top of the HID protocol, a custom message based protocol provides the commands to send and receive data which will be 
described in more detail in this chapter.
Message format
Transmitting data through the USB bus using the HID class protocol is done by reports. A report always contains an ID and the 
data inside the report. In order to successfully communicate with the Airence control section  only reportID 0 may be used.  
More  information about report descriptors can be found on www.usb.org. For now, remember that the Airence only will listen to 
reports with reportID = 0.  
A control message has a fixed size of 8 bytes containing a SIZE byte, COMMAND byte, and a PAYLOAD section of maximal 6 bytes. 
The SIZE byte contains the number of bytes used (max. 8) in the message, including this SIZE byte.
byte
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
SIZE
COMMAND
PAYLOAD
n
cmd
p0
p1
p2
p3
p4
p5
Command byte
The command byte consists of a 2-bit TYPE and a 6-bit ID field. 
bit
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
TYPE
ID
t1
t0
id5
id4
id3
id2
id1
id0
Bit
Symbol
Value
Value
5:0
ID
-
Command Identifier (ID)
7:6
TYPE
00
Write command, from host to device
01
Request command, from host to device
10
Response command, reply from device to host on a request
11
Event, from device to host (i.e. button pressed)
Command ID
A commandID can have a value between 0x01 and 0x3F. The following commandIDs are currently available in the Airence: 
VALUE
DESCRIPTION
0x01
AIRENCE_FIRMWARE_VERSION
0x02
AIRENCE_LED
0x03
AIRENCE_LED_BLINK
0x04
-
0x05
AIRENCE_SWITCH_CHANGE
0x06
AIRENCE_ENCODER_INCREMENT
0x07
AIRENCE_ENCODER_DECREMENT

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  44
MESSAGES 
Write
A message of the type WRITE is transmitted from the PC to Airence. The message is intended to perform an action on the Airence 
control section (i.e. illuminate a LED). If the action is correctly executed, the Airence will reply with a corresponding event. 
AIRENCE_LED_WRITE
byte
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
SIZE
COMMAND
PAYLOAD
0x04
0x02
lednum
color
Byte
Symbol
Value
Description
0
SIZE
0x04
Message size
1
COMMAND
0x02
AIRENCE_LED_WRITE
2
lednum
 
LED number, 1(0x01) to 24(0x18), 0xFF = ALL LEDs
3
color
0x00
NONE (LED off)
0x01
RED
0x02
GREEN
0x03
YELLOW
AIRENCE_LED_BLINK_WRITE 
byte: 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
SIZE
COMMAND
0x06
0x03
lednum
color_on
color_off
speed
Byte
Symbol
Value
Description
0
SIZE
0x06
Message size
1
COMMAND
0x03
AIRENCE_LED_BLINK_WRITE
2
lednum
LED number, 1(0x01) to 24(0x18), 0xFF = ALL LEDs
3
color_on
0x00
NONE (LED off)
 
0x01
RED
 
0x02
GREEN
 
0x03
YELLOW
4
color_off
0x00
NONE (LED off)
0x01
RED
0x02
GREEN
0x03
YELLOW
5
speed
0x00
SLOW
0x01
NORMAL
0x02
FAST
Request
A message of the type REQUEST is transmitted form the PC to Airence. The message is intended to read data from the Airence. 
After the Airence received the request it will respond with a corresponding RESPONSE message. Therefore, a REQUEST message 
always forms a pair with a RESPONSE message. 

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  45
AIRENCE_FIRMWARE_VERSION_REQUEST
byte:
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
SIZE
COMMAND
PAYLOAD
0x02
0x41
byte
Symbol
Value
Description
0
SIZE
0x02
Message size
1
COMMAND
0x41
AIRENCE_FIRMWARE_VERSION_REQUEST
Response
A message of the type RESPONSE is transmitted from the Airence to the PC when prior a firmware version request message was 
received. 
AIRENCE_FIRMWARE_VERSION_RESPONSE
byte:
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
SIZE
COMMAND
PAYLOAD
0x04
0x81
major
minor
Byte
Symbol
Value
Description
0
SIZE
0x04
Message size
1
COMMAND
0x81
AIRENCE_FIRMWARE_VERSION_RESPONSE
2
major
Firmware major revision
3
minor
Firmware minor revision

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  46
Events
A message of the type EVENT is transmitted from the Airence to the PC. An event will be generated when the state of a switch , 
encoder, or LED has changed. These events can be used to synchronize states of LEDs and switches between the Airence and the 
controlled application on the PC. 
AIRENCE_LED_EVENT
byte :
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
SIZE
COMMAND
PAYLOAD
0x04
0xC2
lednum
color
-
-
-
-
Byte
Symbol
Value
Description
0
SIZE
0x04
Message size
1
COMMAND
0xC2
AIRENCE_LED_EVENT
2
lednum
LED number, 1(0x01) to 24(0x18), 0xFF = ALL LEDs
3
color
0x00
NONE (LED off)
0x01
RED
0x02
GREEN
0x03
YELLOW
AIRENCE_LED_BLINK_EVENT
byte : 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
SIZE
COMMAND
PAYLOAD
0x06
0xC3
lednum
color_on
color_off
speed
-
-
Byte
Symbol
Value
Description
0
SIZE
0x06
Message size
1
COMMAND
0xC3
AIRENCE_LED_BLINK_EVENT
2
lednum
LED number, 1(0x01) to 24(0x18), 0xFF = ALL LEDs
3
color_on
0x00
NONE (LED off)
0x01
RED
0x02
GREEN
0x03
YELLOW
4
color_off
0x00
NONE (LED off)
0x01
RED
0x02
GREEN
0x03
YELLOW
5
speed
0x00
SLOW
0x01
NORMAL
0x02
FAST

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  47
AIRENCE_SWITCH_CHANGE_EVENT 
byte :
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
SIZE
COMMAND
PAYLOAD
0x06
0xC5
sw_8_1
sw_16_9
sw_enc_non
usb_2_1
Byte
Symbol
Value
Description
0
SIZE
0x06
Message size
1
COMMAND
0xC5
AIRENCE_SWITCH_CHANGE_EVENT
4:2
sw_m_n
-
bit 0:  switch n    (1=pressed, 0=released)
|
bit 7:  switch m
5
sw_enc_non
-
bit 0:  encoder switch (1=pressed, 0=released)
bit 1:  non-stop switch  (1=pressed, 0=released)
6
usb_2_1
-
bit 0:  USB1 faderstart  (1=ON, 0=OFF)
bit 1:  USB1 ON   (1=pressed, 0=released)
bit 2:  USB1 CUE  (1=pressed, 0=released)
bit 3:  USB2 faderstart  (1=ON, 0=OFF)
bit 4:  USB2 ON   (1=pressed, 0=released)
bit 5:  USB2 CUE  (1=pressed, 0=released)
7
usb_4_3
-
bit 0:  USB3 faderstart  (1=ON, 0=OFF)
bit 1:  USB3 ON   (1=pressed, 0=released)
bit 2:  USB3 CUE  (1=pressed, 0=released)
bit 3:  USB4 faderstart  (1=ON, 0=OFF)
bit 4:  USB4 ON   (1=pressed, 0=released)
bit 5:  USB4 CUE  (1=pressed, 0=released)
 
AIRENCE_ENCODER_INCREMENT_EVENT
byte: 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
SIZE
COMMAND
PAYLOAD
0x03
0xC6
abs_value
-
-
-
-
-
Byte
Symbol
Value
Description
0
SIZE
0x03
Message size
1
COMMAND
0xC6
AIRENCE_ENCODER_INCREMENT_EVENT
2
abs_value
Absolute encoder value [ 0 - 255 ] (wrap around)
 
AIRENCE_ENCODER_DECREMENT_EVENT
byte : 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
SIZE
COMMAND
PAYLOAD
0x03
0xC7
abs_value
-
-
-
-
-
Byte
Symbol
Value
Description
0
SIZE
0x03
Message size
1
COMMAND
0xC7
AIRENCE_ENCODER_DECREMENT_EVENT
2
abs_value
Absolute encoder value [ 0 - 255 ] (wrap around)
We hope to have given you some inside information about this control section of the AIRENCE and sure hope you will be  happy 
with its performance to  make your performance even better.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  48
 
TROUBLESHOOTING
‘USB Controller bandwidth exceeded’ 
in 
Windows 7
Version 1.0 - 2013-05-23

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  49
1	 Table of contents
1	
TABLE OF CONTENTS	
 	
	
45
2	
BACKGROUND	
	
	
46
2.1	
USB System Architecture	
	
	
 
2.1.1	 USB Host	
	
	
 
2.1.2	 USB Devices	
	
	
  
2.2	
Airence USB System Architecture	
	
	
3	
ANALYSIS	
	
	
47
4	
SOLUTION	
	
	
49
5	
USED TOOLS	
	
	
50

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  50
2	
Background
2.1	
USB System Architecture
The USB System Architecture consists of the following main components:
• 
Host (PC) Computer
• 
One or more USB Devices
• 
A physical bus represented by the USB Cable that links the devices with the host (PC) computer. 
2.1.1	
USB Host (your PC)
The main responsibility of the host computer is to control the communication between the host system and USB devices.  
The host computer has two layers: a USB host controller hardware layer, and a software layer, which includes USB device drivers 
for a wide range of USB devices.  
The drivers convert data between the format that is used by the host computer and the format used by the USB devices. 
USB hardware layer is responsible for:
• 
Detecting the attachment and removal of USB devices
• 
Monitoring device status and collecting activity statistics
• 
Providing power to attached USB devices
• 
Managing control and data flow between the USB host and USB devices
• 
Checking the basic validity of bus transactions
USB software layer is responsible for: 
• 
Handling USB devices and their connectivity
• 
USB devices enumeration and configuration
• 
Loading appropriate device drivers
• 
Managing the power on the bus and bus bandwidth
• 
Managing the data transfer between the software and hardware
USB Host (PC) Controller
A USB Host Controller is the hardware either on the computer motherboard or PCI card. It provides an interface for transferring 
streams of data between the host computer and the USB devices. The host computer may have one or multiple USB host controllers with different types of interface.
2.1.2	
SB Devices
The USB Devices are peripherals that use the USB protocol for two way communication with the host computer.  
The main responsibility of the USB Device is to provide the end user with various specific functions, such as a keyboard, a data/
fax modem device, a digital microphone, or a video camera.  
For this reason the official USB Specification uses the term “function” to refer to USB peripheral devices.  
To provide the user with additional attachment points to connect more peripherals there is a special type of USB device called 
USB Hub.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  51
USB Hub
USB Hub is just a device with multiple USB ports for plugging in the USB devices and other hubs. The Internal root hub in the host 
(PC) controller and the external hubs are functionally the same.
2.2	
Airence USB System Architecture
The Airence USB System Architecture consists of the following components: 
• 
USB Hub (for interconnect all the internal peripherals)
• 
4x Stereo Audio codec
• 
USB to serial converter (used to transfer metering data)
• 
Control Section  (switches, encoder, faderstart, ON, CUE signals)
Figure 1. Airence USB System Architecture
3	
Analysis
When all four audio codecs of the Airence mixer are used simultaneously to send and receive audio to/from the PC,  the USB 
controller may exceed the allowed bandwidth of the bus. This problem is noticed in Windows 7 x64 operating system during test 
phase, but could occur on other Windows versions as well.
If windows detects such a bandwidth overload it will show a warning message (see figure on the next page).  
The attached composite device has requested more than 15% of the available resources of the USB host controller. 
Due to the fact the Airence is a composite USB device consisting of four audio codecs, Control section, USB to Serial converter 
and USB Hub there is a lot of USB traffic between the Airence and your PC, if all individual components are used at the same 
time.
Each USB device which is connected to a port on the PC will be attached to a root hub which is connected to one of the available 
Host Controllers. The root hub may consist of multiple ports, which could be the case in your system. If more devices than the 
Airence are connected to the same root hub the devices need to share the resources and therefore a data traffic problem may 
occur.  

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  52
Figure 2. Windows 7 generates warning message
Figure 3. USB View: Visualize the USB System Architecture

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  53
4	
Solution
Figure 4. Connect the Airence exclusively to the Root Hub
In order to prevent the bandwidth overload, simply make sure the Airence is exclusively connected to a Root Hub (see figure 
above). To do so, a software program called ‘USB View’ is used here to visualize the USB tree structure in your system.  
With this tool you are able to check if the Airence is exclusively connected to a root hub. If not, you will see other devices connected to the same Root Hub. 

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  54
In the example below you can see the Airence is connected to the first port (LOC21) of a 2-port roothub.  
There is no device connected to the second port (Loc22).  
Therefore, the Airence does not need to share the USB bandwidth with other devices.   
To recognize the Airence device you can try to identify the internal USB Hub with the aid of the vendor- and product id’s,  
0x0451 and 0x2077 respectively.  
Try to connect to another usb port on your PC if the Airence shares a Root Hub with other devices. 
Figure 5. Visualisation of Airence USB Architecture
5	
Used tools
USB View
http://www.ftdichip.com/Support/Utilities/usbview.zip

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  55

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  56
Firmware Update Procedure
 
VERSION 1.0 
D&R Electronica Weesp BV, Rijnkade 15B, 1382GS Weesp, The Netherlands
Phone: +31 (0)294-418014, Fax: +31 (0)294-416987, Website: https://www.d-r.nl, E-mail: mail@d-r.nl

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  57
Contents
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................................................. 3
Bootloader mode............................................................................................................................................... 3
INSTALLATION............................................................................................................................................... 3
Airence Firmware Updatetool........................................................................................................................... 3
USB bootloader drivers..................................................................................................................................... 7
FIRMWARE UPDATE PROCEDURE................................................................................................................. 9
Preparation......................................................................................................................................................... 9
Flash firmware into device................................................................................................................................ 9
TROUBLESHOOTING.................................................................................................................................... 10
Firmware update failed.................................................................................................................................... 10
Java virtual machine (JVM).............................................................................................................................. 10

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  58
Introduction
Every now and then new firmware versions will be released to provide the Airence mixer with new features or solved bug fixes. 
In order to be able to update the current firmware residing in the Airence mixer a special operating mode called ‘bootloader 
mode’ must be entered to receive new firmware. When powering up the mixer in an ordinary way it will enter the normal operation mode and is ready for use.   
Bootloader mode
To enter the bootloader mode a special startup sequence should be followed:
1)	 Disconnect power
2)	 Push and hold down the encoder switch (located on the control section)
3)	 Connect power
4)	 Release the encoder switch
Installation
Airence Firmware Updatetool
An Airence Firmware Updatetool is available which is required to perform the firmware update. You can download the installer 
from the D&R website (www.d-r.nl)
Airence Firmware Updatetool v1.00 - Setup.zip
Unzip the file to a local folder and double click on the setup file. The welcome screen of the installer should appear. 
-	
Press Next to continue.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  59
-	
Select a destination location for the update tool to be installed into and click Next.
-	
Select a start menu folder and click Next.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  60
-	
Enable the ‘Create a desktop icon’ for a shortcut on the desktop and click Next.
-	
If you agree with the configuration click Install to begin installation.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  61
-	
Setup copies files to the destination install folder.
-	
Click Finish to complete the installation.

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  62
 
USB bootloader drivers
When the Airence mixer enters the bootloader mode it will probably sign up as an ‘unknown device’ in the device manager from 
Windows. To determine if this unknown device is the Airence in bootloader mode, right-click on the device and select properties. 
On the Details tab select Hardware-id’s from the properties selection box and verify the VID and PID of the device.       
	
	
	
	
	
	
VID (Vendor ID):	 03EB 
	
                                                                       	
PID (Product ID): 	2FE4
 
To install the drivers right-click on the device and select update drivers. The drivers can be found in a subdirectory  ‘usb’ of the 
Airence Firmware Updatetool installation folder. For example:
 	
C:\Program Files (x86)\Airence Firmware Updatetool\usb
 

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  63
If the installation of the drivers was successful you should be able to see a screen similar to the one below:
In the device manager the unknown device is correctly installed and now shown as : ATxmega32A4U
The ATxmega32A4U device indicates the Airence is in bootloader mode. 

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  64
Firmware Update Procedure
Preparation
Before you can start with the update procedure the following precautions must be taken:
-	
Connect a USB cable between the Airence mixer and the PC 
-	
Startup the Airence mixer in bootloader mode
-	
Download the latest firmware from www.d-r.nl (e.g. airence_firmware_v1_4.zip)
Flash firmware into device
-	
Startup the Airence Firmware Updatetool application.
-	
Select the firmware (*.hex) from the extracted zip-archive downloaded from the website. 
-	
Press the UPDATE button.
The progress bar gives an indication of the status of the update procedure. When the update is successfully performed the 
Airence mixer automatically leaves the bootloader mode and reboots with the new firmware in normal operation mode. The following message should appear:
 
To verify the current firmware version inside the Airence mixer, press the ‘Get version info’ button. You only can obtain the version info if the device is NOT in bootloader mode. 

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  65
Troubleshooting
Firmware update failed
If you get the following error after pressing the UPDATE button you should check if the Airence mixer is properly connected with 
a USB cable and if the device is in bootloader mode. To determine if the device is in bootloader mode open up the device manager and look for the device: 
Atmel USB Devices -> ATxmega32A4U
Note: Depending of your system it takes a certain amount of time to sign up and enumerate the device in the device manager 
after starting up the mixer in bootloader mode. 
Java virtual machine (JVM)
If you were prompted with the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) error, it means JVM is not installed on your system. Java is required 
for the Airence Firmware Updatetool.  You can download it for free from: http://java.com/

A I R E N C E - U S B   M a n u a l   P a g e  66
DIMENSIONS	
: Main unit
 
Width	
	
	
: 482 mm
Front panel thickness	
: 2 mm
Radius	 	
	
: 20 mm
Height	 	
	
: 355 mm (8HE). 
Depth	
	
	
: 101,50 mm. 
Weight	 	
	
: 9kg. 
Furniture cut out
Drop through hole	
: 450mm x 344mm
Furniture top panel thickness not more than 22mm
DIMENSIONS	
: Extension unit
 
Width	
	
	
: 302 mm
Front panel thickness	
: 2 mm
Radius	 	
	
: 20 mm
Height	 	
	
: 355 mm (8HE). 
Depth	
	
	
: 101,50 mm. 
Weight	 	
	
: 7kg. 
Furniture cut out
Drop through hole	
: 270mm x 344mm
Furniture top panel thickness not more than 22mm
We wish you many creative years of productivity using this quality product from:
Company	
: D&R Electronica b.v.
Address		
: Rijnkade 15-b
Zip Code	
: 1382 GS 
City	
	
: WEESP
Country		
: The Netherlands
Phone	 	
: 0031 (0)294-418 014
Fax	
	
: 0031 (0)294-416 987
Website		
: https://www.d-r.nl  
E-mail	
	
: mail@d-r.nl
SUMMERY 
We hope this manual has given you sufficient information to use this new AIRENCE mixer in your studio. 
If you require more info please contact your local dealer or send us an email at info@d-r.nl and we will answer your email within 
24 hours during weekdays.
In case you have bought this mixer from a previous owner, check out the dealer in your area on our website www.d-r.nl in case 
you need assistance.
