Analysis of Loudspeaker Line Arrays*
MARK S. UREDA, AES Member
JBL Professional, Northridge, CA 91329, USA
A set of mathematical expressions to analyze the performance of loudspeaker line arrays
is provided. At first a set of expressions for straight-line arrays is developed, including the
directivity function, polar response, quarter-power angle, on-axis and off-axis pressure re-
sponses, and two-dimensional pressure field. Since in practice many loudspeaker line arrays
are not actually straight, expressions are provided for curved (arc), J, and progressive line
arrays. In addition, since loudspeaker systems are often not perfect sources, the effects of
spherical radiating sources and gaps between sources are analyzed. Several examples of how
to apply the models are given, and modeled performance is compared to measured polar data.
0 INTRODUCTION
Vertical line arrays of loudspeakers are at present
gaining prominence among sound-reinforcement profes-
sionals. That is not to say that they are an entirely new
concept. Indeed, Klepper and Steele wrote in 1963 [1]:
“Line-source loudspeaker arrays, often called ‘column’
loudspeakers, have recently become of great interest to
sound-system contractors and equipment manufacturers in
this country.”
What is new is that loudspeaker manufacturers have
applied good engineering practice to long known prin-
ciples of line source physics. Systems today provide well-
behaved directivity response, high output power, and high-
quality sound over an extended frequency range. Together
these represent a significant improvement in performance
over conventional column loudspeakers.
Column loudspeakers typically comprise a vertical
stack of full-range direct radiators. They produce modest
sound power levels and exhibit a vertical directivity re-
sponse that changes substantially with frequency. Klepper
and Steele describe problems with column loudspeakers,
including “narrowing of the major (on-axis) lobe at higher
frequencies” and “strong minor off-axis lobes or sidelobes
at high frequencies.” These, they write, are predicted by
equations given by Olson [2]. Their paper prescribes meth-
ods for improving the polar response, but the success of
these techniques is limited by the directional characteris-
tics of the individual loudspeakers themselves, which nar-
row at high frequency.
Today manufacturers of loudspeaker line arrays often
provide specially designed waveguides in place of in-
dividual direct radiators for the high-frequency band.
This is an important improvement. While column loud-
speakers behave like an array of individual, frequency-
dependent acoustic sources, contemporary systems behave
more like continuous line sources. This allows them to
achieve a well-behaved directivity response to very high
frequency.
Manufacturers have also realized that long, perfectly
straight loudspeaker line arrays produce a directivity re-
sponse that often becomes too narrow at high frequencies
for many sound-reinforcement venues. In fact, they have
learned that it is often desirable to produce an asymmetri-
cal response in the vertical plane, for instance, one that
projects energy forward and downward at the same time.
This can be achieved if the array is slightly curved, par-
ticularly along the lower portion. Recently manufacturers
have designed line array loudspeaker systems that can be
curved over the entire length of the array while maintain-
ing the attributes of a continuous source. This allows users
to achieve simultaneously the narrow, long throw charac-
teristics of a straight-line array and the wide, lower fill
characteristics of a curved array.
This paper provides mathematical expressions for esti-
mating the performance of a wide variety of line arrays.
The models are based on theoretical line sources, but the
estimates obtained agree quite well with measurements
taken on real-life line arrays, particularly those from the
latest generation of loudspeaker systems designed specifi-
cally for line array applications.
1 BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW
Most analyses of line sources reference Wolff and Mal-
ter’s [3] seminal work of 1930. Wolff and Malter develop
expressions for the polar response of a linear array of point
*Manuscript received 2003 July 24; revised 2004 February 23.
PAPERS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
467

sources in the far field. The far-field restriction allows the
directivity function to be expressed in closed form. Their
paper has been referenced and/or augmented over the
years by Beranek [4],1 Wood [5], Davis [6], Rossi [7], and
Skudrzyk [8] among others. For the convenience of the
reader, Sections 2.1 through 2.4 summarize important el-
ements of their work as well.
Section 2.5 analyzes the on-axis pressure response of
line sources. Here the far-field restriction is abandoned,
and the pressure is expressed as a function of distance.
This analysis follows the work of Lipshitz and Vander-
kooy [9] and Smith [10], who present the on-axis and
off-axis pressure responses of line sources. They show that
the pressure response undulates near the source while gen-
erally decreasing in level at −3 dB per doubling of dis-
tance. At a certain distance, referred to as the transition
distance,2 the undulations disappear and the response falls
off at −6 dB. The near field is defined as the region be-
tween the source and the transition distance. Beyond the
transition distance is the far field. The transition distance
is a function of the line source length and frequency and
has been estimated by Smith [10], Heil [12],3 Junger and
Feit [13], and Ureda [14, p. 6].
The pressure response of a line source on either side of
the transition distance, however, is more complex than the
on-axis pressure response would suggest. In fact, depend-
ing on the point chosen along the source from which one
begins the pressure response analysis, different results are
obtained. Section 2.5 explores this complexity by compar-
ing the results obtained when different points along a
straight-line source are taken as the initial point. It is
shown that each of these responses represents different
slices through the pressure field. The mathematical expres-
sion for the pressure field of a straight-line source is given
in Section 2.6.
As illustrated throughout Section 2, straight-line sources
produce polar response curves that vary substantially with
length and frequency. At long lengths and high frequen-
cies they get very narrow, often too narrow for sound-
reinforcement venues. Curved or arc sources, however,
produce polar response curves that are materially wider
and approach the included angle of the arc at high fre-
quency. This has been described in many of the texts cited
earlier, including Wolff and Malter [3],4 Olson [2],5 and
Rossi [7, p. 134]. Section 3 of this paper expands on the
analysis of arc sources by providing mathematical expres-
sions for the polar response, on-axis pressure response,
and two-dimensional pressure field.
Arc sources, while useful by themselves in certain
sound-reinforcement venues, are of particular interest
when used in conjunction with straight-line sources. The
combination is referred to as a J source [15]. J sources are
comprised of a straight-line source placed above and ad-
jacent to an arc source. The straight segment provides long
throw and the arc segment provides coverage in the down
front region. Together they provide an asymmetrical polar
response in the vertical plane that is well suited for many
venues. Section 4 describes J sources and provides expres-
sions for the polar response, on-axis response, and two-
dimensional pressure field.
Like a J source, a progressive6 source [15] also pro-
vides an asymmetrical polar response in the vertical plane.
Unlike a J source, however, a progressive source is a
continuous curve. The upper portion of the source is
nearly straight but then increases in curvature toward the
bottom. Section 5 provides expressions for its polar re-
sponse, on-axis pressure response, and two-dimensional
pressure field. These show that a progressive source
produces a response that is remarkably constant with
frequency.
In practice, even with specially designed loudspeaker
systems, large line arrays are not perfectly continuous
line sources. They invariably have gaps between the
individual array elements, which are essentially nonradi-
ating portions of the total line source. Certain effects of
such discontinuities are described by Urban et al. [16].
Section 6 expands on this work and analyzes the polar
responses of straight-line sources with various size gaps.
It provides guidelines for acceptable gap-to-wavelength
ratios.
Urban et al. also describe certain effects produced if
the radiating elements in loudspeaker line arrays pro-
duce radial wavefronts instead of pure, flat wavefronts.
He models this as a stack of slightly curved sources.
Section 6 examines the polar response of this stack and
shows that grating lobes occur at high frequency or large
curvature.
Finally, it is important to examine how closely the
mathematical models developed in this paper estimate the
performance of loudspeaker line arrays. Section 7 com-
pares the modeled and measured polar response curves
of three loudspeaker line arrays. Despite the vagaries
of real-life sources and measurement challenges, the mod-
els provide remarkably good estimates of array perfor-
mance over a wide frequency range. Button [17] and En-
gebretson et al. [18] compare measured results against
predictions produced by models similar to the ones devel-
oped in the present paper. Section 7 takes measured results
from Engebretson et al. and compares them directly
against predictions produced explicitly by the straight-line
source and arc source models developed in the following
sections.
1The author shows the polar response (in dB) of line sources
(p. 96) and curved sources (p. 106).
2“Transition” distance is used instead of “critical” distance to
avoid confusion with the term “critical distance” used in archi-
tectural acoustics, where it refers to the distance at which the
direct and reverberant fields are equal in level. See Eargle [11].
3The author discusses the response of line arrays in the near
field (Fresnel region) and the far field (Fraunhofer region).
4See page 212 for a discussion on curved line sources.
5See p. 27, where Olson provides the directional characteris-
tics of 60, 90, and 120° arc sources.
6The term “progressive” is used in the present paper instead of
“spiral” originally used by the author. The term spiral array is
sometimes used in reference to so-called barber-pole arrays, as in
Klepper and Steele [1].
UREDA
PAPERS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
468

2 STRAIGHT-LINE SOURCES
2.1 Directivity Function of Straight-Line
Sources—General Form
A line source can be modeled as a continuum of infi-
nitely small line segments distributed along a line. The
acoustic pressure radiated from a line source7 is
p =−L2
L2 Ale−jkrl+l
rl
dl
where L is the length of the line source, A(l) is the ampli-
tude function along the line, (l) is the phase function
along the line, k is the wavenumber, and r(l) is the distance
from any segment dl along the line to the point of obser-
vation P.
The evaluation of this expression is simplified if we
assume that the observation point P is a large distance
away, that is, the distance is much greater than the length
of the source, and the distances to P from any two seg-
ments along the line are approximately equal. This allows
us to bring the r(l) term in the denominator to the front of
the integral since, by definition,
1
rL2 ≈
1
r−L2 ≈
1
r .
Conversely, the r(l) term in the exponential has a signifi-
cant influence on the directivity function. This is because
the relatively small distance differences to P from any two
segments are not small compared to a wavelength, par-
ticularly at high frequency. Fig. 1 shows that r(l) in the
exponent can be expressed as
rl = l sin 
where  is the angle between a line bisecting the source
and a line from the midpoint of the source to P. Substi-
tuting, the far-field pressure at angle  of a line source is
p =
1
r −L2
L2
Al e−jkl sin +l dl.
The directivity function R() of a line source is the
magnitude of the pressure at angle  over the magnitude of
the maximum pressure that can be obtained, that is,
R =p
pmax
.
The maximum radiated pressure is obtained when all
segments along the line radiate in phase, that is, the ex-
ponential function equals unity.8 It is given as
pmax =
1
r−L2
L2
Al dl.
The general form of the far-field directivity function R()
of a line source is then
R =−L2
L2
Al e−jkl sin +l dl
−L2
L2
Al dl
.
2.2 Directivity Function of Straight-Line
Sources—Uniform Amplitude and Phase
The general form of the straight-line source directivity
function developed in Section 2.1 is valid for any ampli-
tude and phase functions along the length of the line
source. A uniform line source has constant amplitude and
zero phase shift along its length, that is, A(l)  A and (l)
 0. Substituting into the general form yields an expres-
sion for the directivity function of a uniform line source
RU(),
RU =
1
L−L2
L2
e−jkl sin  dl .
Solving the integral and applying Euler’s identities, this
becomes
RU =
sin kL2 sin 
kL2 sin 
or in terms of wavelength instead of frequency,
RU =
sin L sin 
L sin 
.
Fig. 2 shows polar response curves9 of a uniform line
source at various ratios of source length and wavelength.
The polar response is wide at low ratios of L/. As the
ratio is increased, the directivity pattern narrows and ex-
hibits nulls and lobes. These are explored in more detail in
Section 2.3.
7The time-varying factor ejt is omitted.
8Note that the maximum pressure at any given distance and
frequency may never actually be obtained.
9A polar response curve is the directivity function expressed in
decibels and plotted on a polar chart. The on-axis pressure is used
as the reference pressure, that is, polar response  20 log [R()/
R(0)].
Fig. 1. Geometric construction for far-field directivity function of
a line source.
PAPERS
ANALYSIS OF LOUDSPEAKER LINE ARRAYS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
469

2.3 Lobes and Nulls—Uniform
Straight-Line Source
Fig. 2 shows that at long wavelengths ( > L) the polar
response of a uniform straight-line source is fairly omni-
directional. At shorter wavelengths lobes and nulls are
obtained. The position and magnitude of these are easily
calculated.
The far-field directivity function of a uniform line
source is given in Section 2.2 as
RU =
sin L sin 
L sin 
.
This function has the generic form of sin z/z. To evaluate
this function on axis, that is, z  0, we must use
L’Hospital’s rule, taking derivatives of the numerator and
denominator. This yields
lim
sin z
z
→cos 0 = 1.
The fact that the limit approaches unity indicates that there
will always be a maximum on axis. Off-axis nulls are
obtained when sin z/z goes to zero. This occurs where the
argument z reaches (nonzero) multiples of . Substituting
the full expression for z, nulls are obtained when
L
 sin  = m
where m is a nonzero integer. Therefore nulls are ob-
tained at
sin = m

L
where m  1, 2, 3, . . . . Off-axis lobes of the directivity
function are found between the nulls, that is, at
sin =
3
2L ,
5
2L ,
7
2L, . . . .
This can be written as
sin =
m + 12
L
where m  1, 2, 3, . . . .
Finally it is possible to calculate the amplitude of the
lobes of a uniform line source. Since the amplitude de-
creases inversely with z, the pressure amplitude of the mth
lobe is
Am =
cos m
m + 2
where m  1, 2, 3, . . . .
2.4 Quarter-Power Angle—Uniform
Straight-Line Source
Often it is useful to determine the −6-dB angle of a
uniform straight-line source. This is accomplished by set-
ting the generic form of the directivity function equal to
0.5,10 that is,
sin z
z
= 0.5.
10The directivity function is a pressure ratio. A pressure ratio
of 0.5 yields a sound pressure level difference of −6 dB.
Fig. 2. Polar response curves of a uniform line source.
UREDA
PAPERS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
470

Solving numerically, z  1.895. The −6-dB point on one
side of the central lobe is at angle , where
z = 1.895 =
L
 sin .
The quarter-power angle is the total included angle be-
tween the −6-dB points on either side of the central lobe
and is given by
−6 dB = 2.
Solving for  in terms of length and wavelength and sub-
stituting we have
−6 dB = 2 sin−1 1.895
L
≈2 sin−1 0.6
L
.
The quarter-power angle as a function of L/ is shown
in Fig. 3. A similar result is obtained by Benson [19].11
At small L/, that is, a short line source and long wave-
length, the quarter-power angle is wide. At large ratios of
L/, that is, long sources and short wavelengths, the quar-
ter-power angle is narrow. For small angles,12 where sin z
≈z, the line source quarter-power angle is
−6 dB =
1.2
L
where  is in radians. Expression  in degrees, we have
−6 dB = 68.8

L
degrees.
In some cases it is convenient to use frequency rather
than a ratio of wavelength and source length. Rewriting,
the quarter-power angle equation for uniform line sources
becomes (approximately)
−6 dB ≈
2.4 × 104
fL
for L in meters and f in hertz, or
−6 dB ≈
7.8 × 104
fL
for L in feet and f in hertz.
The directivity response of a line source is a plot of the
quarter-power angle versus frequency. The directivity re-
sponse of uniform line sources of several lengths is shown
in Fig. 4. These show that the quarter-power angle of large
sources is quite narrow at high frequency. For instance,
at 10 kHz a 4-m-long uniform straight-line source has a
−6-dB angle of 0.6°.
2.5 On-Axis Pressure Response of
Straight-Line Sources
The on-axis pressure response of a line source is derived
in much the same manner as the directivity function. The
pressure radiated from each infinitely small line segment
is summed at an observation point P. In this case, how-
ever, P is at a distance x along an axis normal to the source
and no far-field assumptions are made.
2.5.1 Conventional Approach—Midpoint Method
Fig. 5 shows the conventional geometric construction
used to solve for the pressure along a path normal to the
source, beginning at its midpoint. Referring to Fig. 5, L is
11Note that Benson solved for the −3-dB angle.
12The small angle approximation holds for angles less than
about 30°. Note that sin (/6)  0.5000 and /6  0.5235 so
that the error is less than 5%.
Fig. 3. Quarter-power angle of a uniform line source.
Fig. 4. Directivity response of uniform line sources 1, 2, 4, and
8 m long.
PAPERS
ANALYSIS OF LOUDSPEAKER LINE ARRAYS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
471

the total length of the source and rmid is the distance from
any radiating element dl of the source to any distance x
along the horizontal axis. The general form for the radiated
pressure at x is
pmidx =−L2
L2 Al e−jkrmidx, l+l
rmidx, l
dl
where
rmidx, l = x2 + l2 .
The pressure response is the logarithmic ratio of the mag-
nitude of the pressure squared at x over the magnitude of
the pressure squared at some reference distance, that is,
Rx = 20 log px
pxref
.
The on-axis pressure response of a 4-m uniform
straight-line source, where A(l) = A and (l)  0, at 8 kHz
is shown in Fig. 6. The pressure response generally de-
creases at a rate of −3 dB per doubling of the distance out
to approximately 100 m. It exhibits undulations in this
region, the magnitudes of which increase as the distance
approaches 100 m. Beyond 100 m the pressure amplitude
no longer undulates and decreases monotonically at −6 dB
per doubling of the distance. The point at which this
change occurs is referred to as the transition distance. The
region between the source and the transition distance is
referred to as the near field, and the region beyond is the
far field.
The transition distance varies with source length and
frequency. Fig. 7 shows the on-axis response of three dif-
ferent-length uniform line sources at 8 kHz. As the length
L increases, the transition distance increases. Fig. 8 shows
the on-axis response of a 4-m-long uniform line source at
500 Hz, 2 kHz, and 8 kHz. It illustrates that the transition
distance also increases with frequency.
2.5.2 Midpoint versus Endpoint
The conventional approach used to determine the on-
axis pressure response of a line source discussed in Sec-
Fig. 5. Geometric construction for calculating on-axis pressure
response of a line source (midpoint convention).
Fig. 6. On-axis pressure response (from midpoint) of a uniform
line source (4 m long, 8 kHz).
Fig. 7. On-axis response (from midpoint) of 2; 4; and 8-m uni-
form line sources at 8 kHz. 4- and 8-meter response curves are
offset by 10 and 20 dB, respectively.
Fig. 8. On-axis response (from midpoint) of a 4-m uniform line
source at 500 Hz, 2 kHz, and 8 kHz. 2- and 8-kHz response
curves are offset by 10 and 20 dB, respectively.
UREDA
PAPERS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
472

tion 2.5.1 is to take a path normal to the source beginning
at its midpoint. This yields a result, however, that is unique
to this path. Choosing the midpoint as the initial point
introduces symmetry into the analysis and minimizes the
apparent aperture of the source. If a different initial point
is chosen, the line source appears longer on one side of
this point than on the other side. This difference is maxi-
mized when the endpoint of the source is chosen. In this
case the source has length L in one direction and zero
length in the other. If the on-axis pressure is summed
along a path normal to the source beginning at the end-
point of the line source, the transition distance increases
substantially.
Fig. 9 shows a modified geometric construction for cal-
culating the on-axis pressure response. The pressure
summed along a path normal to the endpoint of a line
source is
pendx =−L2
L2 Al e−jkrendx, l+l
rendx, l
dl
where
rendx, l =x2 +l +
L
2
2
.
Fig. 10 compares the on-axis response of a 4-m-long
uniform straight-line source, where A(l)  A and (l) 
0, at 8 kHz using the midpoint and endpoint methods. The
last peak of the midpoint near-field response occurs at
approximately 100 m. The last peak of the endpoint re-
sponse occurs at approximately 400 m. Note that the end-
point response is at a lower amplitude level than the mid-
point response in the near field. In the far field the curves
converge and yield the monotonic decrease of −6 dB per
doubling of the distance as described.
If the origin of the path is moved beyond the endpoint,
the distance to the last peak occurs at greater and greater
distances. It can be shown that the distance to the far field
continues to increase as one chooses a path further off the
midpoint axis. However, the pressure levels fall off quite
dramatically once the endpoint is breeched. This is shown
in Fig. 11. The first two curves labeled “0” and “L/2” are
the midpoint and endpoint pressure responses, respec-
tively, shown in Fig. 10. The next two curves are on-axis
pressure response curves beginning at points one length
(L) and three half-lengths (3L/2) displaced vertically from
the midpoint.
The curves in Fig. 11 are slices through the pressure
field, normal to the source, at increasing displacement
from the midpoint. We can see that as the origin of the
path is moved off the midpoint, the amplitude levels of the
pressure decreases in the near field. It is approximately
−6 dB at the endpoint, but decreases to around −40 dB at
L and 3L/2. Also, the pressure response curves L and 3L/2
undulate in a fashion that in the aggregate is nearly flat
from the source to the far field.
The L and 3L/2 response curves are so low in level
relative to the midpoint response that they are of limited
significance. However, the endpoint curve (L/2) is a ma-
terial feature of the pressure field. It is approximately
−6 dB down from the midpoint response and undulates
Fig. 10. Comparison of midpoint and endpoint pressure response
curves of a 4-m uniform line source at 8 kHz.
Fig. 9. Geometric construction for calculating pressure response
along a path originating at the endpoint.
Fig. 11. Pressure response along paths normal to line source at
various points of origin (4 m at 8 kHz).
PAPERS
ANALYSIS OF LOUDSPEAKER LINE ARRAYS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
473

well past the midpoint transition distance. The fact that
two such disparate response curves can be obtained by
merely shifting the origin of the normal path demonstrates
the ambiguity of the term “on-axis response.”
2.6 Pressure Field of Straight-Line Sources
The most comprehensive approach to observe the pres-
sure response of a line source is to compute its pressure
field. This eliminates the question of midpoint versus end-
point. It is obtained by rewriting the expression for the
radiated pressure in terms of Cartesian coordinates as set
up in Fig. 12. The pressure at any point P is
px, y =−L2
L2 Al e−jkrx, y, l+l
rx, y, l
dl
where
rx, y, l = x2 + y −l2.
Fig. 13 shows the pressure field of a 4-m uniform
straight-line source, where A(l)  A and (l)  0, in
several frequency bands. The major on-axis lobe gets nar-
rower with increasing frequency, as expected. The minor
lobes increase in number and lower amplitude levels. At
high frequency they dissolve into very complex patterns of
constructive and destructive interference. Note that the
pressure varies across the major lobe at 8 kHz in a manner
consistent with the pressure slices shown in Fig. 11. The
undulations extend to a greater distance from a line normal
to the endpoint than from the midpoint.
3 ARC SOURCES
Many loudspeaker line arrays used in practice are actu-
ally curved. This is because pure straight-line arrays pro-
duce a narrow vertical polar response at high frequency—
often too narrow to reach audiences beneath and slightly in
front of the array. A slightly curved array provides supe-
rior coverage in this area. One important type of curved
line source is the arc source.
An arc source is comprised of radiating elements ar-
ranged along a segment of a circle. At all frequencies it pro-
vides a wider directivity response than a straight-line source
of the same length. At high frequency it provides a polar
pattern that corresponds to the included angle of the arc.
3.1 Polar Response of Arc Sources
The derivation of the directivity function of an arc
source follows the same steps as described for a straight-
line source. Fig. 14 shows the geometric construction of an
arc source with radius R and total included angle . The
pressure radiated by an arc at off-axis angle  is
pA =−2
2 A e−jkrA, +
rA, 
R d.
As in Section 2.1, the evaluation of this expression is
simplified if we assume that the observation point P is a
large distance away. In this case the distance is much
greater than the length of the arc, and the distances to P
from any two segments along the arc are approximately
equal. This allows us to bring the rA term in the denomi-
nator to the front of the integral since by definition
1
rA2 ≈
1
rA−2 ≈
1
rA
.
Conversely, the rA term in the exponential has a signifi-
cant influence on the directivity function. This is because
the relatively small differences in distance to P from any
two segments are not small compared to a wavelength.
Fig. 14 shows that rA in the exponent can be expressed as
rA,  = 2R sin

2 sin

2 + 
where  is the angle between a line that bisects the arc
angle and a line from the center point of the arc to P.
Substituting, the far-field directivity function of an arc is
then expressed in general form as
RA =
−2
2
A e−jkrA, +R d
−2
2
AR d 
.
If we assume constant amplitude and zero phase shift
along the arc, that is, A()  A and ()  0, the direc-
tivity function reduces to13
RA =
1
R−2
2
e−jkrA, R d
13This integral does not have a convenient closed-form solu-
tion similar to the one obtained for the line array. Wolff and
Malter [3] provide a point source summation version of the di-
rectivity function as follows:
R =
1
2m + 1	
n=−m
n=m
cos
2R

cos  + n
+ i	
n=−m
n=m
sin
2R

cos  + n
where m is an integer, 2m + 1 is the number of point sources, and
 is the angle subtended between any two adjacent point courses.
Fig. 12. Geometric construction for pressure field of a line
source.
UREDA
PAPERS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
474

Fig. 13. Pressure fields of a 4-m line source. Contour scale numbers are removed from 2-, 4-, and 8-kHz plots for clarity.
PAPERS
ANALYSIS OF LOUDSPEAKER LINE ARRAYS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
475

where rA is as expressed before. The polar response curves
of a uniform 60° arc source at various ratios of radius and
wavelength are shown in Fig. 15. In general these are wide
for low ratios of R/ and approach the included angle of
the arc at higher ratios.
3.2 On-Axis Pressure Response of Arc Sources
The on-axis pressure response of an arc source can be
expressed in a form similar to the earlier expressions for
straight-line sources. Fig. 16 shows the geometric con-
struction of an arc source with radius R and total included
angle . The pressure of an arc source at distance x is
pAx =−2
2 A e−jkrAx, +
rAx, 
R d
where
rAx,  = x + R1 −cos 2 + R2 sin2 .
Fig. 17 provides a comparison of the pressure responses
of equivalent-length uniform straight-line and arc sources.
Though the arc source is curved only 30°, its on-axis re-
sponse is materially smoother in the near field than the one
produced by the straight-line source.
Like a line source, the pressure response of an arc
source changes with the arc length and frequency. Fig. 18
shows the on-axis responses of three uniform arc sources
of various lengths. The different lengths are provided by a
constant radius (4 m) with an adjusted included angle. Fig.
19 shows how the pressure response changes with fre-
quency. Note that the transition from the near field to the
far field is generally smoother for an arc than for a line
source at all lengths and frequencies.
3.3 Pressure Field of Arc Sources
The two-dimensional pressure field of an arc source is
given by
pAx, y =−2
2 A e−jkrAx, y, +
rAx, y, 
R d
Fig. 14. Geometric construction of arc source for polar response.
Fig. 15. Polar response curves of arc source.
Fig. 16. Geometric construction of arc source for on-axis re-
sponse.
UREDA
PAPERS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
476

where
rAx, y,  = x + R1 −cos 2 + y −R sin 2.
The geometric construction is shown in Fig. 20. Fig. 21
shows the pressure field of a uniform arc source, where
A()  A and ()  0, in several frequency bands. The
response is quite different from that produced by a uni-
form straight-line source. At low frequency a uniform arc
source can produce either a lobe or a null on axis. At mid
and high frequencies a wedge pattern is produced that
corresponds to the included angle of the arc.
4 SOURCES
A J source is comprised of a line source and an arc
source. In general the straight segment is located above the
arc segment and is intended to provide the long-throw
component of the polar response. The arc segment is in-
tended to provide coverage in the area below and in front
of the source. Together the segments provide an asymmet-
ric polar response in the vertical plane.
4.1 Polar Response of J Sources
The directivity function of a J source is obtained by
combining the directivity functions of the line and arc
sources presented in previous sections. The geometric con-
struction is shown in Fig. 22, where L is the length of the
straight segment and R and  specify the arc segment. We
assume that the straight and arc segments are adjacent and
that the center point of the arc is on a line perpendicular to
the straight segment through its lower endpoint.
Fig. 17. On-axis pressure response of an arc source and a
straight-line source at 4 kHz. Arc source has an included angle of
45° and a radius of 4 m. Line source has a length equal to the arc
length (3.14 m).
Fig. 18. On-axis pressure response of three arc sources (  15,
30, and 60°) at 8 kHz where R  4 m. These correspond to arc
lengths of approximately 1, 2, and 4 m. The 30 and 60° curves
are offset by 10 and 20 dB, respectively.
Fig. 19. On-axis pressure response of an arc source at various
frequencies (  30° and R  4 m). The arc length is approxi-
mately 2 m. The 2- and 8-kHz curves are offset by 10 and 20 dB,
respectively.
Fig. 20. Geometric construction for arc source pressure
field.
PAPERS
ANALYSIS OF LOUDSPEAKER LINE ARRAYS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
477

Fig. 21. Pressure fields of uniform arc source.
UREDA
PAPERS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
478

If we choose the center point of the line segment as the
origin, then the pressure radiated from the line segment in
the far field at off-axis angle  is
pL =
1
r−L2
L2
ALl e−jkrL, l+Ll dl
where
rL, l = l sin 
as shown in Section 2.1. Here AL(l) and L(l) are the
amplitude and phase functions of the line segment. Now
since we must rotate the arc segment by /2 relative to the
horizontal, we will also change the limits of integration.
The pressure radiated in the far field from the rotated arc
source is
RA =
1
r 0

AA e−jkrA, +AR d
where
rA,  = 2R sin

2 sin

2 + 
and AA() and A() are the amplitude and phase func-
tions of the arc segment. To properly sum the radiated
pressure from the line and arc segments, a new function is
required to express the relative distance difference be-
tween them. Referring to Fig. 22, it is given as
rJ =
L
2 sin .
The general form for the radiated pressure in the far field
of a J source is then
pJ =
1
r−L2
L2
ALl e−jkrL, l+L dl
+0

AA e−jkrA, l+A+rJR d.
If we assume that the amplitudes per unit length are uni-
form over the line and arc segments, and that the phase
shifts are zero, the relative source strengths are propor-
tional to their relative lengths. Letting AL and AA be the
constant amplitudes per unit length of the line and arc
segments, respectively, the directivity function of a J
source reduces to
RJ =
1
ALL + AARAL−L2
L2
e−jkrL, l dl
+ AA0

e−jkrA, +rJR d.
The contributions of the line segment and the arc segment
to the polar response of a uniform J source are shown in
Fig. 23. As expected, the line segment provides a long
throw and the arc segment provides a relatively wide angle
of coverage rotated downward. The response of the J
source is a blend of the two.
The polar response of a J source changes with the
length of the line segment, the radius and included angle
of the arc segment, the relative amplitudes of the two
segments, and frequency. Fig. 24 shows polar response
curves of a J source with a 2-m-long line segment, a 1-m
radius, a 60° included angle, and equal amplitudes per unit
length. The polars show that the straight segment of the J
source dominates the response and produces a very narrow
beam, particularly at high frequency. The arc segment
does not fully balance the high gain of the straight
segment.
Fig. 22. Geometric construction of a J source for polar response.
Fig. 23. Contribution of a line and an arc source to the polar
response of a J source.
PAPERS
ANALYSIS OF LOUDSPEAKER LINE ARRAYS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
479

There are several approaches to providing a more bal-
anced response. One is to make the straight segment
shorter, thereby reducing the gain. A second is to increase
AA relative to AL. For instance, one might use a J source
that has a 1-m-long straight segment (as opposed to 2 m in
the previous example) and set AA  2AL (instead of AA 
AL). The polar response of this modified J source is con-
siderably more balanced than the uniform J source, as
shown in Fig. 25.
4.2
On-Axis Pressure Response of
J Sources
The on-axis pressure response of a J source is obtained
by combining the pressure response functions of the line
and arc sources presented in the preceding. The geometric
construction is shown in Fig. 26, where L is the length of
the straight segment, and R and  specify the arc segment.
Note that the lower endpoint of the arc segment is taken as
the initial point for the on-axis response. Based on this
geometry, the pressure radiated at point P from a J
source is
pJx =0
L ALl e−jkrLx, l+Ll
rLx, l
dl
+0
 AA e−jkrAx, +A
rAx, 
R d
where
rLx, l = x2 + R sin  + l2
rAx,  = x + R1 −cos 2 + R2sin  −sin 2.
Fig. 27 compares the on-axis pressure responses of uni-
form equivalent-length straight-line and J sources, where
A()  A. The straight segment of the J source dominates
the response, producing undulations in the near field very
similar to those of the straight-line source. However, the
on-axis aperture of the J source is foreshortened relative to
the equal-length line source, so the distance to the far field
is marginally shorter.
4.3 Pressure Field of J Sources
The geometric construction for the pressure field of a J
source is shown in Fig. 28. The general form for the pres-
sure at P is
pJx, y =0
L ALl e−jkrLx, y, l+L
rLx, y, l
dl
+ R0
 AA e−jkrAx, y, +A
rAx, y, 
d
Fig. 24. J-source polar response curves (Example 1). L  2 m, R  1 m,   60°, AL  1, AA  1.
UREDA
PAPERS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
480

where
rLx, y, l = x2 + y + l2
rAx, y,  = x + R1 −cos 2 + y + L + R sin 2.
The pressure field of a uniform J source, where A()  A
and ()  0 in several frequency bands, is shown in
Fig. 29. The parameters of the J source are the same as
those used for the modified J source described in Section
4.1, that is, a 1-m straight segment and AA  2AL. These
plots show clearly that a J source is a blend of straight and
arc sources. This is particularly true at mid and high frequen-
cies, where the constituent responses are easily identifiable.
5 PROGRESSIVE SOURCES
Like a J source, a progressive source provides an asym-
metric polar response in the vertical plane. However,
Fig. 25. J-source polar response curves (Example 2). L  1 m, R  1 m,   60°, AL  1, AA  2.
Fig. 26. Geometric construction of a J source for on-axis pressure
response.
Fig. 27. Comparison at 2 kHz of on-axis pressure response of a
4-m-long straight-line source and a J source. L  2 m, R  2 m,
  60°, AL  1, AA  1.
PAPERS
ANALYSIS OF LOUDSPEAKER LINE ARRAYS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
481

unlike a J source, it is a continuous curve rather than
two distinct segments. The curvature increases with the
distance along the curve. This results in an upper portion
that is largely straight and a lower portion that is curved
downward.
5.1 Polar Response of Progressive Sources
There are numerous possible mathematical expressions
for progressive expansions, each providing different rates
of curvature. The relevant set of expressions for loud-
speaker arrays is characterized by curvature changes at
equal intervals of length along the progressive curve. The
interval corresponds to the height of a single loudspeaker
enclosure of the array.
An arithmetic progressive source is one for which the
angle between successive enclosures changes by a prede-
termined angle given by (n −1), where n is the nth
enclosure and 1 < n < N, with N being the total number of
enclosures in the array. For example, if   1° and the
first enclosure is hung at 0° (horizontal), the second en-
closure would be hung at 1° relative to the first enclosure
and the third at 2° relative to the second enclosure. This
defines a progressive curve, here the aiming angle of the
nth enclosure is oriented to the horizontal axis by 0°, 1°,
3°, 6°, 10°, and so on—an arithmetic expansion. An in-
cremental angle  of 2° would yield 0°, 2°, 6°, 12°, and
20°. The terminal angle 	 of an array, that is, the aiming
angle relative to the horizontal of the last enclosure, is
given by
	 =
1
2 N1 + N
where N is the total number of enclosures. The total length
of the source is
L = NH
where H is the height of a single enclosure. These two
terms, 	 and L, fully define an arithmetic progressive
source.
The far-field directivity function of an arithmetic pro-
gressive source is derived in the same manner as used
earlier for the line, arc, and J sources. The pressure radi-
ated along the source is summed at a point P in the far
field. The shape of the polar response curves will be de-
termined primarily by the small distance function rS.
The first step is to express the progressive source as a
continuum of small radiating segments of length L. L
should be chosen to be a small fraction of the shortest
wavelength of interest. As a practical guideline, L should
be set approximately equal to one-quarter of a wavelength,
that is,
L =

4 .
The total number of segments is then
M =
L
L
and the incremental angle between the element is

 =
2	
MM + 1 .
The progressive source can then be expressed in paramet-
ric form as
x =	
=0

−sin
1
2 + 1
 L
y = L +	
=0

−cos
1
2 + 1
 L.
The geometric construction of an arithmetic progressive
source is shown in Fig. 30. Its far-field directivity func-
tion is
RS =	
=0
M
A e−jkrS, +
	
=0
M
A
where
rS,  = sin −tan−1
x
yx2 + y2.
The far-field directivity function for a uniform progressive
source, where A  A and   0, is
RS =
1
M + 1	
=0
M
e−jkrS, 
where rS was given before. The polar response of a uni-
form arithmetic progressive source is remarkably constant
with frequency. Fig. 31 shows the polar response curves
of a 5-m-long progressive source with a terminal angle
of 45°.
Fig. 28. Geometric construction for pressure field of a J-source.
UREDA
PAPERS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
482

Fig. 29. Pressure field of a J source versus frequency.
PAPERS
ANALYSIS OF LOUDSPEAKER LINE ARRAYS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
483

Fig. 30. Geometric construction of a progressive source for polar response.
Fig. 31. Polar response of a 5-m-long progressive source with 45° terminal angle.
UREDA
PAPERS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
484

5.2 On-Axis Pressure Response of
Progressive Sources
The geometric construction for the on-axis pressure re-
sponse of a progressive source is shown in Fig. 32. The
pressure response along a path from the lower end is
pSx =	
=0
M
A
e−jkrSx, +
rSx, 
where
rSx,  = x −x2 + yM −y2
and A is the amplitude at element  and  is the relative
phase at element .
Fig. 33 compares the on-axis response curves of equiva-
lent-length uniform straight-line and progressive sources.
These curves show that the progressive source has reduced
undulations in the near field and a smoother transition
from the near field to the far field.
5.3 Pressure Field of Progressive Sources
The geometric construction for the pressure field of a
progressive source is shown in Fig. 34. The pressure at any
point P is
pSx, y =	
=0
M
A
e−jkrSx, y, +
rSx, y, 
where
rSx, y,  = x −x2 + y −y2.
The pressure field of a uniform progressive source in sev-
eral frequency bands is shown in Fig. 35. These results
illustrate the well-behaved asymmetrical response of a
progressive source that makes them an excellent geometry
upon which to base loudspeaker arrays for sound-
reinforcement applications.
6 ADVANCED TOPICS
As a practical matter, large line arrays of loudspeakers
are not perfectly continuous line sources. For instance,
they may have gaps between the loudspeaker enclosures
because of enclosure construction material or spacing.
These gaps are effectively nonradiating portions of the line
and may have an effect on the performance of the array.
Also, certain radiating elements in loudspeaker line arrays
may produce radial wavefronts instead of pure, flat wave-
fronts. This may also have an effect on the performance of
the array. These topics are analyzed in the following sections.
6.1 Gaps in Line Sources
In previous sections we assume that each type of line
source is continuous along its entire length. In practice,
Fig. 32. Geometric construction of a progressive source for on-
axis pressure response.
Fig. 33. Pressure response comparison at 2 kHz of a 45° terminal
angle, 4-m-long progressive source and a line source of the same
length.
Fig. 34. Geometric construction for pressure field of a progressive source.
PAPERS
ANALYSIS OF LOUDSPEAKER LINE ARRAYS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
485

Fig. 35. Pressure fields of a progressive source versus frequency.
UREDA
PAPERS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
486

however, it may not be possible to achieve this. For in-
stance, the thickness of the material used to construct a
loudspeaker enclosure does not radiate acoustic energy.
When loudspeaker enclosures are stacked into an array,
these nonradiating segments are distributed along the
length of the array. This can be modeled by limiting the
integration of the line source to the radiating portions only.
Referring to Fig. 36, d is the dimension of the nonradiating
element on either side of the radiating element.
The directivity function of a line source with N elements
of length L and gaps between them is
R =	
1
N N−1L+d
NL−d
Al e−jkl sin +l dl
N−1L+d
NL−d
Al dl
.
In general, gaps have very little effect on the primary
lobe but change the structure of the off-axis lobes and
nulls. Fig. 37 shows the linear polar response14 of a four-
element uniform line source with gaps. The graphs show
the effects of changing the radiating percentage from
100% to 90, 75, and 50%. At low frequency, where the
gap length is a small fraction of the wavelength, gaps have
very little effect. At high frequency, the sidelobe structure
changes materially with the gap length. The lobes get
wider and change position.
Contemporary loudspeaker line array enclosures are
usually designed to maximize the radiating percentage. If
an enclosure is 0.5 m high and constructed of typical ma-
terials, radiating percentages can exceed 90%. However, if
the spacing between enclosures gets large, gaps may ex-
ceed this threshold and the polar response will be affected.
6.2 Stack of Arc Sources versus Line Sources
In practice, certain components of a loudspeaker system
may produce wavefronts that are curved instead of per-
fectly straight. When stacked in an array, these may more
closely resemble a stack of arc sources rather than a con-
tinuous straight-line source. Fig. 38 shows a stack of three
arc sources representing an array of three loudspeaker
components with radial wavefronts. The effects that radial
wavefronts have on the directivity function can be esti-
mated by summing the radiation from a stack of arc
sources.
As derived in Section 3.1, the directivity function of a
14Linear polar response is a rectilinear representation of the
polar response, that is, dB along the y axis and angle along the x
axis.
Fig. 36. Line array of four elements of length L and nonradiating
gap d on either end.
Fig. 37. Directivity function of four-element line array with four
radiating percentages at three length-to-wavelength ratios. -  -
50%, --- 75%; –– 90%; —— 100%.
PAPERS
ANALYSIS OF LOUDSPEAKER LINE ARRAYS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
487

uniform arc source is
RA =
1
R−2
2
e−jkrA, R d
where
rA,  = 2R sin

2 sin

2 + .
Here R is the radius and  the included angle of the arc.
The directivity function of a stack of arc sources is ob-
tained by applying the first product theorem.15 In this case
the directivity function of the arc is multiplied by the
directivity function of an array of simple sources. The
far-field directivity function for an array of N simple
sources of equal amplitude and phase distributed a dis-
tance D apart along a line is given by
RP =
1
N	
n=1
N
e−jkn−1D sin .
Applying the first product theorem, the directivity func-
tion of a vertical stack of arc sources is
RAP = RARP.
Fig. 39 shows the effects of nonflat wavefronts on the
directivity function of the sources, compared to a perfectly
flat wavefront. As with gaps in a line source, a curvature
primarily produces changes in the lobe/null structure of
the off-axis response. The changes increase with increas-
ing curvature and are more predominant when the curva-
ture is a material fraction of a wavelength.
Fig. 39(a) compares the directivity function of a uni-
form line source of length 3L with an array of three curved
sources of length L, where the curvature  of the arc is
one-eighth wavelength. The directivity functions are very
similar, with only small differences in the lobe/null struc-
15The first product theorem states that the directional factor of
an array of identical sources is the product of the directional
factor of the array and the directional factor of a single element
of the array. See Kinsler et al. [20].
Fig. 38. Stack of three arc sources of radius R, included angle ,
and curvature .
Fig. 39. Comparison of directivity functions of a stack of three
curved sources and a straight-line source. Curved sources have
element length L  150 mm, total included angle   20°.
Straight-line source has total length 3L.
UREDA
PAPERS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
488

ture. In particular, note that the nulls at approximately 18,
35, and 60° are not as deep with the stack of arc
sources.
Fig. 39(b) and (c) shows the directivity functions of the
uniform line and the three-element array at curvatures of
one-quarter and one-half wavelengths. In these cases,
lobes gradually replace the nulls at 18, 35, and 60°. At
one-quarter wavelength the lobe at 18° is approximately
10 dB below the level of the on-axis lobe, up from ap-
proximately 20 dB. This represents a practical limit to the
curvature, which maintains, generally speaking, the direc-
tivity function of a pure line source. The response at one-
half wavelength is unacceptable as the 18° lobe is here
nearly equal in amplitude to the primary lobe.
This one-quarter-wavelength limit on curvature allows
us to estimate, for a given curvature, the practical upper
frequency limit for which it maintains the directivity re-
sponse of a uniform line source. If a source has an element
length L of 130 mm and a total arc angle of 20°, then
 =
L
2 tan

4 = 6.6 mm
and the upper frequency limit is
f =
c
4 ≈13 kHz.
Polar response curves of a stack of three 150-mm-high,
20° sources are shown in Fig. 40. The data are superim-
posed over the polar response of a line source 450 mm
long. The 20° source tends to merge the third and fourth
off-axis lobes. The amplitude of this merged lobe in-
creases with frequency. At approximately 12.5 kHz the
lobes are 10 dB below the primary on-axis lobe. This
corresponds closely to the 13 kHz estimate given earlier.
Fig. 40. Polar response curves of a stack of three 150-mm-high, 20° arc sources (---) superimposed over response of a 450-mm
straight-line source (——).
PAPERS
ANALYSIS OF LOUDSPEAKER LINE ARRAYS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
489

7 APPLICATIONS
The mathematical models developed in the previous
sections will provide useful estimates of the performance
of many types of loudspeaker line arrays. However, the
accuracy of the estimates may be compromised by several
factors. First, real-life loudspeaker systems do not often
behave like perfect sources. In addition to the gaps and
radial wavefronts discussed in Section 6, other potential
factors include cone or diaphragm breakup, suspension
and magnetic nonlinearities, and enclosure resonance and
edge (diffraction) effects. Second, collecting far-field data
can be problematic since the microphone must be placed at
large distances. Most anechoic chambers provide adequate
distances to measure only relatively small arrays. Large
arrays can be measured outdoors, but environmental fac-
tors such as wind and atmospheric turbulence may affect
results. Alternatively, data may be taken in a large indoor
space, but the acoustical characteristics of the room must
be isolated and removed from the measurements. None-
theless, despite all of these potential sources of errors,
useful estimates can be produced, as illustrated in the fol-
lowing examples.
7.1 Example 1: Small Straight-Line
Array—Low-Frequency Model
The first example compares the modeled polar response
of a small straight-line array against measured results. The
array is comprised of six small horns stacked in a vertical
array, as shown in Fig. 41. Each horn is approximately 8
in (203 mm) tall, resulting in an array 48 in (1.22 m) high.
Polar data were collected on this array at a distance of 15
ft (4.6 m) in an anechoic chamber. See Ureda [21].
The most straightforward approach to model this array
is to assume that it is a uniform straight-line source. This
assumption will hold at low frequency, where the mouth is
less than one wavelength high. Since this horn has a
mouth16 height of approximately 6.5 in (165 mm), the
highest usable frequency of the model is approximately 2
kHz. From Section 2.2 the directivity function of a uni-
form line source is
RU =
1
L−L2
L2
e−jkl sin  dl
where in this case L  48 in (1.22 m). Fig. 42 shows
measured versus modeled polar responses. Note that the
model assumes a sine wave input that yields a very fine
16The horn is 8 in (203 mm) tall, but the mouth is only 6.5 in
(165 mm) because mounting flanges on either side of the mouth
are 0.75 in (19 mm) wide.
Fig. 41. Vertical stack of six 8-in (203-mm)-tall, 40° by 20°
horns.
Fig. 42. Measured (  ) versus modeled (——) polar response curves of array in Fig. 41. Model based on a uniform straight-line source
with a sine wave input. Measured data are one-third-octave pink noise.
UREDA
PAPERS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
490

lobe and null structure. The measured data are one-third-
octave pink noise, which tends to fill the sharp nulls of a
sine wave response. Nonetheless, the modeled response
closely resembles the measured data. Note that the 1.5-in
(38-mm) gaps between the horn mouths do not materially
affect the modeled performance.
7.2 Example 2: Small Straight-Line
Array—High-Frequency Model
The polar response estimate of the six-horn array de-
scribed in Section 7.1 can be extended to higher frequen-
cies, if we use a stack of arc sources instead of a uniform
straight-line model. This is reasonable since the polar re-
sponse of the individual horns will approach the vertical
coverage angle at higher frequency. The horns have a vertical
coverage angle of 20°. Using the directivity function of a
stack of uniform arc sources from Section 6.2, where
RAP = RARP
RP =
1
N	
n=1
N
e−jkn−1D sin 
RA =
1
R−2
2
e−jkrA, R d
rA,  = 2R sin

2sin

2 + 
R =
L
2 sin

2
and setting N  6, L  6.5 in (165 mm), D  8 in (203
mm), and   20°, we obtain the polar response curves
shown in Fig. 43. Again, the curves are based on a sine
wave response, and the measured data were collected in
one-third-octave bands of pink noise. Nonetheless the
model predicts the grating lobes at the higher frequencies.
7.3 Example 3: Large Curved Array
Engebretson et al. [18] recently took polar response data
on several large arrays. Among these was an eight-element
curved array. Each element is approximately 0.5 m high,
resulting in a total length of 4 m. Vertical polar data were
derived from ground-plane MLSSA impulse measure-
ments taken at 20 m on 5° intervals. The data were taken
inside a vacant airplane hangar to prevent wind-borne tem-
perature gradients and other disturbances. Fig. 44 shows
the array of eight cabinets configured for ground-plane
measurements. The eight boxes are shown set on end with
5° splay angles between adjacent cabinets.
This array can be modeled as an arc source with an
included angle of 40° and an arc length of 4 m. The polar
response at standard one-third-octave center frequencies
can be estimated using the far-field directivity function of
a uniform arc source. From Section 3.1, this is
RA =
1
R−2
2
e−jkrA, R d
where
R =
L

and
rA,  = 2R sin

2sin

2 + .
The modeled polar response curves are shown in Fig.
45. The measured data from Engebretson et al. are shown
as dots superimposed on the modeled curves. Note that the
measured data are at 5° increments—the directivity func-
tion provides continuous curves. We can see that the
agreement between measured and modeled is quite rea-
sonable. The large lobes along the sides of the polars may
be due to diffraction effects or room effects. Neither of
these effects is accounted for in the model. Nonetheless,
the model provides a useful estimate of the polar response
across more than six octaves.
8 SUMMARY
This paper provides mathematical models that estimate
the performance of several types of loudspeaker line ar-
rays. Specifically, models are provided to estimate the
polar response, on-axis pressure response, and pressure
fields of straight, curved (arc), J, and progressive arrays.
The first few sections provide a review of uniform
straight-line sources, including derivations of the far field
polar response, lobe and null structure, and quarter-power
angle as a function of frequency. The remaining sections
represent largely new work and are summarized as follows.
First, the pressure response of a line source as a function
of distance is shown to be dependent on the path along
which the response is calculated. Typically a path is taken
normal to the source, beginning at its midpoint. This in-
troduces symmetry into the model and produces a result
that is unique to this origin and path. The paper illustrates
how different responses are obtained by choosing alternate
origins. The paper further notes that it is typical to use the
midpoint of the source as the origin for the normal path to
estimate the transition distance. This understates the com-
plexity of the transition from the near field to the far field.
The paper suggests using pressure fields instead of pres-
sure response to fully capture this complexity and derives
the required mathematical expressions.
Second, J and progressive line sources are introduced
and are shown to provide asymmetrical polar responses in
the vertical plane. Such asymmetry is useful in many
sound-reinforcement venues, and this is why so many con-
temporary loudspeaker line arrays are based on these con-
figurations. The paper provides analytical models for both
types and illustrates typical performance. Of particular
note, progressive arrays produce a vertical polar response
that is remarkably constant with frequency over a very
wide bandwidth.
Third, line arrays of real loudspeakers are not perfectly
continuous line sources, and this may introduce anomalies
PAPERS
ANALYSIS OF LOUDSPEAKER LINE ARRAYS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
491

Fig. 43. Measured (  ) versus modeled (——) polar response curves of array in Fig. 41. Model based on a stack of arc sources with
a sine wave input. Measured data are one-third-octave pink noise.
Fig. 44. Indoor ground-plane setup for vertical polar response measurements of eight-element curved array.
UREDA
PAPERS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
492

into their response. The paper provides a model that shows
the effect of gaps in line sources that are introduced by the
thickness of the loudspeaker enclosure construction mate-
rial. The model shows that at low frequency, where the
gap length is a small fraction of the wavelength, gaps have
very little effect. At high frequency the sidelobe structure
changes materially with the gap length. The lobes get
wider and change position. As a practical matter, contem-
porary loudspeaker line array enclosures are usually de-
signed to maximize the radiating percentage, often in ex-
cess of 90%. This minimizes the effects of gaps across the
useful bandwidth.
Fourth, real loudspeaker elements may not produce per-
fectly flat wavefronts, so that a vertical stack of loudspeak-
ers does not provide a perfectly straight-line source. The
paper provides an analytical model to estimate the effect
Fig. 45. Measured polar response data (  ) shown against predicted polar response of eight-element curved array.
PAPERS
ANALYSIS OF LOUDSPEAKER LINE ARRAYS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
493

of the curvature of the elemental sources of a line array. It
shows that the effects are frequency dependent and negli-
gible as long as the curvature is less than one-quarter
wavelength.
Finally, measured polar response data of two different
loudspeaker line arrays were compared to modeled results.
In general the models produce very good estimates of
actual performance despite the fact that loudspeaker non-
linearities, enclosure diffraction, and environmental ef-
fects among others are not accounted for. Robust results
can be obtained for a wide variety of array types across an
extended frequency range of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to express his appreciation to his
colleagues at JBL Professional, including Mark Gander,
David Scheirman, Mark Engebretson, and Doug Button.
They piqued his interest in line arrays, encouraged and
supported this body of work, and were always fun to work
with.
10 REFERENCES
[1] D. L. Klepper and D. W. Steele, “Constant Direc-
tional Characteristics from a Line Source Array,” Audio
Eng. Soc., vol. 11, no. 3, p. 198 (1963).
[2] H. F. Olson, Elements of Acoustical Engineering,
1st ed. (Van Nostrand, New York, 1940), p. 25.
[3] I. Wolff and L. Malter, “Directional Radiation of
Sound, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 2, no. 2, p. 201 (1930).
[4] L. Beranek, Acoustics, 1st ed. (McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1954).
[5] A. B. Wood, A Textbook of Sound (Bell and Sons,
London, 1957).
[6] A. H. Davis, Modern Acoustics, 1st ed. (Macmillan,
New York, 1934), p. 63.
[7] M. Rossi, Acoustics and Electroacoustics (Artech
House, Norwood, MA, 1988).
[8] E. Skudrzyk, The Foundations of Acoustics
(Springer, New York, 1971).
[9] S. P. Lipshitz and J. Vanderkooy, “The Acoustic
Radiation of Line Sources of Finite Length,” presented at
the 81st Convention of the Audio Engineering Society, J.
Audio Eng. Soc. (Abstracts), vol. 34, pp. 1032–1033 (1986
Dec.), preprint 2417.
[10] D. L. Smith, “Discrete-Element Line Arrays—
Their Modeling and Optimization,” J. Audio Eng. Soc.,
vol. 45, pp. 948–964 (1997 Nov.).
[11] J. Eargle, Handbook of Sound System Design
(ELAR Publ., Commack, NY, 1989).
[12] C. Heil, “Sound Fields Radiated by Multiple
Sound Source Arrays,” presented at the 92nd Convention
of the Audio Engineering Society, J. Audio Eng. Soc. (Ab-
stracts), vol. 40, p. 440 (1992 May), preprint 3269.
[13] M. Junger and D. Feit, Sound, Structures, and
Their Interactions (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1972).
[14] M. S. Ureda, “Line Arrays: Theory and Applica-
tions,” presented at the 110th Convention of the Audio
Engineering Society, J. Audio Eng. Soc. (Abstracts), vol.
49, p. 526 (2001 June), convention paper 5304.
[15] M. S. Ureda, “J and Spiral Line Arrays,” presented
at the 111th Convention of the Audio Engineering Society,
J. Audio Eng. Soc. (Abstracts), vol. 49, p. 1233 (2001
Dec.), convention paper 5485.
[16] M. S. Urban, C. Heil, and P. Bauman, “Wavefront
Sculpture Technology,” J. Audio Eng. Soc. (Engineering
Reports), vol. 51, pp. 912–932 (2003 Oct.).
[17] D. Button, “High-Frequency Components for
High-Output Articulated Line Arrays,” presented at the
113th Convention of the Audio Engineering Society, J.
Audio Eng. Soc. (Abstracts), vol. 50, p. 957 (2002 Nov.),
convention paper 5650.
[18] M. E. Engebretson, M. S. Ureda, and D. J. Button,
“Directional Radiation Characteristics of Articulating Line
Array Loudspeaker Systems,” presented at the 111th Con-
vention of the Audio Engineering Society, J. Audio Eng.
Soc. (Abstracts), vol. 49, p. 1233 (2001 Dec.).
[19] J. E. Benson, “Theory and Applications of Elec-
trically Tapered Electro-Acoustic Arrays,” in IREE Int.
Electronics Conv. Digest (1975 Aug.), pp. 587–589.
[20] L. Kinsler, A. Frey, A. Coppens, and J. Sanders,
Fundamentals of Acoustics, 4th ed. (Wiley, New York,
1982).
[21] M. S. Ureda, “Wave Field Synthesis with Horn
Arrays,” presented at the 100th Convention of the Audio
Engineering Society, J. Audio Eng. Soc. (Abstracts), vol.
44, p. 630 (1996 July/Aug.), preprint 4144.
THE AUTHOR
UREDA
PAPERS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
494

Mark Ureda received a B.S. degree in engineering from
UCLA, an M.S. degree in acoustics from Penn State, and an
M.B.A. from the UCLA Graduate School of Management.
Mr. Ureda joined the Altec Lansing Corporation in
1976 as an engineer in the acoustics research group. There
he codeveloped the Mantaray constant directivity horns. In
1980 he was promoted to director of acoustics and led the
development of several new lines of horns and loudspeak-
ers. He left the company when it was sold in 1984 and
began a career in aerospace. He returned to audio in 1990
as a consultant to Mark IV Audio, where he developed
ArraySHOW, a software package that computes radiated
sound fields of horn arrays. In 1999 he joined JBL Pro-
fessional and developed the VerTec line array calculator.
Audio is a hobby for him. He continues his aerospace
career at Northrop Grumman, where he is the corporate
vice president of Strategy and Technology. He is respon-
sible for strategy development and mergers and acquisi-
tions in the space and electronics segments.
Mr. Ureda has authored numerous technical papers on
horns, directivity measurements, line sources, and loud-
speaker/horn arrays.
PAPERS
ANALYSIS OF LOUDSPEAKER LINE ARRAYS
J. Audio Eng. Soc., Vol. 52, No. 5, May 2004
495
