© 1982 Rane Corporation
N
O
T
E
1
0
2
Professional Audio Products
ANALOG I/O STANDARDS
•   3-PIN CONNECTOR WIRING
•   BALANCED INPUTS & OUTPUTS
•   FLOATING UNBALANCED OUTPUTS
•   RFI & EMI PROTECTION
•   GROUNDING
•   PASSIVE BYPASS
INTRODUCTION
Quality engineering necessitates standards.
Recognizing this, Rane has adopted an input/output
(I/0) convention for all of its products which parallels international standards where applicable and
accepted practices elsewhere. This Note describes
and discusses each of these so the user of our
equipment will never be in the dark regarding
polarities, grounding or connector wiring. In general, we are a left-to-right, front-to-back, top-tobottom society—which has absolutely nothing to do
with this Note. It’s just interesting.
Dennis Bohn
V.P. Research & Development
Although written in 1982, Rane customers continue to request this Note. They refer to it often for
its basic information and background on connectors, circuit and wiring conventions. Indeed, the
derivation given for the differential-mode and common-mode input impedance of the everyday
difference amplifier continues to be referenced by other authors. While some of it may seem
dated (and is) we continue to keep it among our current Rane Notes for its historical perspective
and general usefulness. Please read it with its origin date in mind. Seeded throughout the text are
a few  parenthetical Update Notes. These aid in making certain important concepts current.  For
exact detailed specifics on any current Rane product, contact our Technical Service Department.

CONNECTOR CONVENTION
The single biggest source of wiring confusion in the
pro audio industry is 3-pin connectors. Even their name
is a source of confusion. Most commonly called “XLR”
jacks, they are also known as “Cannon plugs”, “3-pin
connectors”, “XLR-type” jacks, and “circular connectors”. The name confusion makes sense since this type of
jack has never been given a generic title. Other audio
connectors are commonly referred to as “phono” (originally called RCA jacks), or “phone” (¼" jacks, after
headphones and telephones—their original usage), or
“DIN” plugs (Deutsch Industry Norm) a German standards organization and European standard.
Nothing comparable has caught on for 3-pin connectors, so they have become known by the original
manufacturer’s model number. The original manufacturer was ITT-Cannon and the model number was
“XLR”. Today, “XLR” is a registered trademark of ITTCannon and cannot legally be used to describe any other
manufacturer’s version of this connector. And since very
few use ITT-Cannon XLR connectors, violation of their
trademarked name is commonplace. Until something
better comes along, Rane will refer to this type of jack as
a “3-pin connector”.
3-PIN CONNECTORS
Much to many people’s surprise there is a standard
for wiring 3-pin connectors—not two, as commonly
believed. The conflicting so-called “European” and
“American” standards are myths. There is one standard.
It is IEC 268¹ issued in 1975 and signed by 17 countries,
including the UK and USA. In addition, the same convention was adopted separately in the UK as BS 5428².
And finally, has been made an American National
Standard. ANSI PH7.102-1983. There should be no
conflict in connectors. There obviously is, and that is a
sorry reflection of how badly informed are many manufacturers of pro audio equipment. (Update Note: In 1992,
the Audio Engineering Society finally issued it’s Standard AES14.1992 agreeing with the above standards.)
Rane wires its 3 and 5-pin connectors per IEC 268 as
follows:
3-Pin Connectors
Pin 1
Ground (Shield, screen, etc.)
Pin 2
Positive (Signal, Hot, etc.)
Pin 3
Negative (Return, Common, etc.)
5-Pin Connectors
Pin 1
Ground
Pin 2
Left Positive
Pin 3
Left Negative
Pin 4
Right Positive
Pin 5
Right Negative
¼" PHONE JACKS
On Rane equipment outfitted with input/output phone
jacks, the wiring convention for standard tip-ring-sleeve
(TRS) connectors is:
TRS ¼" Jacks
Tip = Positive
Ring = Negative
Sleeve = Ground
TS ¼" Jacks
Tip = Positive
Sleeve = Ground
For ¼" TRS output jacks designed exclusively for
headphone use, the standard is:
Headphone Jacks
Tip = Left Positive
Ring = Right Positive
Sleeve = Common Ground
TRANSFORMERLESS BALANCED INPUTS
Rane incorporates automatic balanced-unbalanced
inputs on all of its pro audio products. Balanced inputs
are a thing of beauty. They take two signal lines and
amplify only the difference between them while rejecting anything that is common. The common stuff is all
the garbage induced in the lines as they dutifully connect
two pieces of equipment. Hum, noise, AM radio stations,
police, fire and ambulance radio signals, radar, fluorescent lights—even life itself—all competing to violate the
pure signal as it tries heroically to traverse from one
piece of gear to another.
Many solutions exist to accommodate balanced
inputs. Transformers are the most common. And the
most expensive. And the most troublesome.
So much for transformers.
Rane uses the best active balanced input design that
fits the application and budget for each particular unit.
These range from the true instrumentation amplifier
designs used in Flex (and other) units (see the Flex
Users Guide for details), to the very popular and successful difference amplifier found throughout the proaudio industry.
A difference amplifier, like its name implies, is one
that amplifies only the difference between two input
signals. For instance, two inputs of +1 volt and -1 volt
respectively result in an output of +2 volts for unity gain
designs, i.e., a difference of +2 volts. Or, two signals
equal in value, say, +1 volt each, result in 0 volts output
(their difference). Two equal signals are called common,
and the amplifier is said to be operating common mode
(as opposed to differential mode). For real-world audio
input signals the amplifier operates in both modes
simultaneously—it amplifies anything that is different
(signal) and rejects anything that is common (garbage).

before this circuit can be used. The problem is one opamp gets shorted to ground if an unbalanced (mono)
plug is used for interconnect. If allowed to happen this
can cause possible damage to the op amp, along with
possible distortion interaction with the other op-amp if
they are part of the same IC package. Rane solves both
of these problems very simply by adding resistors in
series with each output (isolation of reactive output loads
require these anyway), and by ensuring that separate opamp packages are used. These things, along with using
IC’s capable of driving lines, guarantee that shorting
either of the outputs does not damage the op-amp or
induce any distortion products into the other side.
The myth involves a mistaken belief that the crosscoupled output stage developed by Thomas Hay at MCI
(AES preprint no. 1723) retains the 6dB headroom
advantage of balanced lines when used in an unbalanced
fashion. Hay’s circuit does two nice things when either
side is shorted: [1] The shorted op amp’s output is forced
to zero volts. It does not drive the output resistor at all,
so no stress is put on the output stage. [2] It doubles the
gain of the unshorted op amp. This way, the output still
delivers the same level for the same input either balanced or unbalanced. For example, a 1 volt input produces either ±1 volt output balanced, or 2 volts unbalanced. On the surface, this suggests the 6dB headroom
improvement offered by all balanced output stages is
preserved when used unbalanced. This is not true at all.
Since the gain of the output stage is doubled then it will
run out of headroom 6dB earlier than when operated
balanced. The op amp can only swing so many volts.
When only one op amp is driving the line there will be a
6dB loss of headroom—period. It does not matter how
cleverly the op amp is configured.
Since a discretely implemented cross-coupled output
design requires many carefully trimmed precise parts,
without producing any real advantages. Rane does not
use it. Where appropriate. Rane does use a special lasertrimmed integrated circuit developed for this purpose.
This design exhibits the same 6dB loss of headroom
when used unbalanced, but otherwise is an excellent
balanced line driver in a small package. (See note 124
for additional details.)
With a single op-amp difference amplifier, you can
have either equal common mode input impedance or
equal differential mode input impedance, but not both
(see sidebar box on back page for details). Of the two the
most important is common mode impedance; it must be
equal for the minimization of hum and RFI pick up.
With equal common mode impedance, you get
unequal differential impedance. For some designs
(where all resistors are equal), the mismatch can be as
much as three to one, with the positive input impedance
being three times the negative input impedance. This
sounds like a big problem, when in fact, it is not. All it
means is that the load impedance seen by the positive
and negative line drivers are not equal, so the negative
driver has to deliver more current. But, as long as the
impedance are within reason (at least 5k ohms or
greater), you really do not have a problem.
AUTOMATIC BALANCED-UNBALANCED
OPERATION
Figure 1 shows a balanced stage with a TRS ¼"
phone jack input. There is a bit of cleverness going on
here that comes for free. Using a stereo phone plug into
the stereo jack gives you the balanced line input. Not so
obvious is that by using a mono phone plug the circuit
automatically switches to unbalanced single line operation. Nice, huh? What happens is that the ring of the jack
gets shorted to ground by the mono plug and turns the
difference amp into a non-inverting stage with a gain of
two (assuming all resistors equal), but there is a 6dB pad
(a loss of ½) hung on its positive input, so the net result
is a unity gain unbalanced input. The stage becomes
universal now, being either balanced or unbalanced,
depending on whether the input plug is stereo or mono.
TRANSFORMERLESS BALANCED OUTPUTS
Balanced outputs have evolved in similar fashion to
balanced inputs, starting out with everything using
transformers and gradually moving toward
transformerless solutions. The most commonly seen
solid-state circuit involves two op amps as shown in
Figure 2 (or some variation of this configuration). There
is one problem and one myth that must be overcome
Figure 2. BALANCED OUTPUT STAGE
Figure 1. TRANSFORMERLESS
BALANCED INPUT STAGE

FLOATING UNBALANCED ¼" OUTPUTS
On many Rane products fitted with ¼" outputs, a
floating unbalanced drive circuit is used. What is required is an output scheme compatible with balanced or
unbalanced inputs that allows signal ground and shield
(chassis) grounds to be isolated.
are bolted together in the same rack. All of Rane’s
products may be intermixed with other brands with
minimal hum problems.
Like the balanced input stage of Figure 1, the floating
output stage of Figure 3 automatically switches to a
conventional unbalanced output stage if a mono phone
jack is used for interconnection. The ring of the jack gets
shorted to the sleeve, thus grounding the sleeve as you
would in a normal unbalanced system.
CHASSIS GROUND
Signal ground is tied to chassis ground by a network
consisting of a 10 ohm resistor and a .01 microfarad
capacitor in parallel. (Update Note: the resistor has been
replace by a Ground Lift switch on most products.)  The
small resistor allows the signal ground and the chassis
ground to be at different potentials for all audio frequencies; while the capacitor shorts the two grounds together
for high radio frequencies. The actual chassis is carefully
tied to the chassis ground path at only one point. This is
critical if proper chassis shielding is to be realized.
SIGNAL POLARITY THROUGH RANE
PRODUCTS
While not wishing to engage in the controversy that
rages on in the audio world regarding whether or not
signal inversion is audible, it is Rane’s policy to not
invert signals through its products. Our position is very
simple—overall signal inversion is not necessary, so
why do it?
The best solution, as is so often true, is the simplest.
It is no more complex than Figure 3. By taking a regular
single-ended (unbalanced) line driver and floating its
ground you create a compatible system for driving
differential (balanced) inputs that is trouble free. Figure
4 shows the interface between the two systems. Note that
while the chassis of each unit may be at the same potential, their signal grounds are allowed to be at different
potentials. This is very important in keeping hum
common mode, and not differential. Any difference of
potential existing between the two grounds is seen as a
common mode signal and is rejected. This problem is
particularly acute where units of various manufacturers
Figure 4. INTERCONNECTION
Figure 3. FLOATING UNBALANCED
1/4" TRS OUTPUT

Figure 5. PASSIVE BYPASS WIRING
PASSIVE BYPASS
It is Rane’s philosophy that Bypass switches should
not require power to operate. For this reason all bypass
circuitry is totally passive as shown in Figure 5. (Update
Note: Some digitally controlled products violate this
rule, while others use relays to accomplish the same
function. Technically not passive, but they work in a failsafe mode so that bypassing is automatic with power
failure.) With the Bypass switch engaged, all signal
connections are rerouted directly to the output (including
ground) thus turning the unit into a rather expensive 3wire patch cord. (Note that the floating output ground
reverts to a straight through balanced ground connection
in bypass condition.) If at any time, power is lost to a
Rane product, simply pressing the Bypass switch completely restores the signal path. Some Rane products use
relays to automatically restore signal path upon power
loss. Check data sheets.
RFI & EMI PROTECTION
Radio frequency interference (RFI) is one of the most
annoying problems that plagues any piece of equipment
featuring high gain (e.g. mic preamp stages in mixers). It
normally enters as a common mode signal induced into
the mic input cables, although it also gets in via the line
cord, or in extremely bad areas directly onto the output
lines.
The use of balanced inputs and outputs on Rane
products greatly reduces their susceptibility to RFI pick
up. In addition, RFI filter traps are featured on all high
gain inputs. The single point chassis ground concept
discussed earlier further helps in reducing RFI problems.
Praying doesn’t hurt either.
Electro-magnetic interference (EMI) can also be very
troublesome if proper steps are not taken during product
design. EMI is primarily due to one piece of equipment
inducing 50Hz or 60Hz hum into another piece of
equipment. For example, power amplifiers with their
large transformers and associated magnetic fields may
easily induce hum into low level signal processors
having high gain. Rule: Thou shalt not mount thy
amplifier upon thine mixer.
Proper shielding is essential in reducing any piece of
equipment’s susceptibility to EMI. All Rane products
utilize steel chassis and front panels to help shield
against stray field pick up. Balanced inputs further help
in rejecting EMI since it is nearly always a common
mode signal. And, again, the single point chassis ground
is another important safeguard.

plus input port of the op amp—and the minus port
(virtual short). The ring input current equals the
voltage across resistor R2, divided by R2. The voltage
equals +½V— (–1V), or 3/2 volts. The current is then
3/2 R2. The ring input impedance is, by definition, the
input voltage (–1V) divided by the input current
(–3/2R2), (the minus sign indicates current is flowing
out of the circuit) giving an answer of 2/3 R2.
Common Mode Negative Input Impedance
The negative common mode input impedance is
found from equation (3):
 Rin (–) =   R3 + R4     R2 
(3)
           R3
For the case where all four resistors are equal. R in
equals 2 R2.
Again, an example may be the best way to illustrate
equation (3). For common mode input signals, the op
amp works to reject them such that the output will be
zero. If the output is zero and the input currents to the
op amp may be ignored (a reasonable assumption with
modern IC’s) then the negative input impedance is
simply R1 + R2. Equation (3) is the general equation
found by writing the input current equation as before,
and dividing it into the negative input voltage. It serves
to illustrate the negative input bootstrap effect caused
by the feedback.
Comment
For further confusion (clarification?) it is necessary
to reiterate that both cases occur simultaneously. That
is, the negative input impedance is lower than R2 for
all differential input signals and higher than R2 for all
common mode signals—at the same time. Audio input
signals are almost always a mixture of signal (differential input) and interference (common mode input).
Differential Or Common Mode Positive Input
Impedance
Figure 1 shows a standard difference amplifier. On
the surface it looks simple enough, but close examination of the available literature and text books covering
difference amplifiers reveals a subtle complexity that
causes great confusion. It all revolves around the fact
that the negative input impedance is dynamic while the
positive input impedance is static. That is, the positive
impedance is unrelated to the type of input signal or
feedback resistor. It is always equal to equation (1),
whether the input signal is differential or common
mode.
Rin (+) = R3 + R4 
(1)
This is not true for the negative impedance: the
negative impedance is different depending on the
nature of the input signal. This is due to the dynamic
servo loop nature of the feedback circuitry, which is
always working to keep the voltage at the negative
input to the op amp equal to the voltage at the positive
input (the virtual short concept).
Differential Mode Negative Input Impedance
The negative differential input impedance is not
equal to resistor R2 as popularly believed. It is equal to
equation (2):
Rin (–) =  R3 + R4   R2 
(2)
  2R4 + R3
For the most common design where all four resistors are equal, Rin equals 2/3 R2.
An example may be the best way to understand why
the impedance is 2/3 R2. Assume there is +1 volt at the
tip and –1 volt at the ring of the input jack and that all
resistors are equal. There is therefore. +½ volt at the
Printed in the U.S.A. on Recycled Paper
©Rane Corporation 10802 47th Ave.W., Mukilteo WA, 98275-5098 TEL (425)355-6000 FAX (425)347-7757
520-014 FEB99
1. International Electrotechnical Commission Standard No. 268. Part 12, titled. “Circular Connectors for Broadcast and Similar Use”, 1975. Signers were Australia, Belgium. Canada, Denmark, Egypt, Hungary, Israel, Japan,
Netherlands, Norway, Romania, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the UK, and USA.
2. British Standards Institution No. BS 5428. Part 5. Sec. 3, 1980/81.
REFERENCES
INPUT IMPEDANCE OF DIFFERENCE AMPLIFIERS
