 
Microphone Usage for Sports Broadcasting 
by Helmut Wittek, September 2016 
 

 
2 / 13 
Microphone Usage for Sports Broadcasting 
Direct sound: 
- 
Loud, discrete sounds in the stadium 
such as drums, grunting, yelling, ball 
hits, stadium announcements, etc. 
Diffuse sound and ambience: 
- 
Reverberation 
- 
Basic ambience, audience noise 
- 
Stadium music (if applicable) 
- 
Motor noise (if applicable) 
 
Introduction: The goals of audio for sports broadcasting ................................................................................................. 2 
1. 
Which microphone arrangements offer the greatest potential for sports broadcasting? ......................................... 3 
2. 
Main microphones and ambience microphones ..................................................................................................... 3 
3. 
Spot and effects miking ........................................................................................................................................ 8 
4. 
Commentator miking ......................................................................................................................................... 12 
5. 
Sound for sports events – a complex production ................................................................................................. 13 
 
 
Introduction: The goals of 
audio for sports broadcasting 
Audio for sports broadcasting is a specialty that 
places extremely high demands on the equipment—
the microphones in particular. They have to sound 
good while reproducing the sound of a complex, 
often irregular space; one must be able to set them 
up within a few hours; they must be easy to handle, 
yet robust enough to withstand wind and weather, 
and they must be reliable under rough, everyday 
conditions. And they must be nearly invisible, since 
they can’t be allowed to block the view of the event 
nor of the advertising banners. All this makes life 
very interesting for the sound engineers, planners, 
equipment operators and manufacturers who 
support this special field. 
Given the great popularity of televised sports 
broadcasts, the number of people hearing the results 
can be very large. And the qualitative expectations 
for sports broadcasting are also very high. This 
comes partly from the enormous competition among 
service providers, but also from the sound engineers, 
who realize how much untapped potential there is 
for television sound to involve the audience in the 
powerful atmosphere of an event. When creative 
minds are involved in originating the sound, and 
when the necessary expenditures are not skimped 
upon, the total experience of the audience can be 
improved significantly. 
The arrangement chosen for the microphones is an 
important part of the overall sound concept for a 
sports broadcast. The main goals of a microphone 
arrangement in sports broadcasting are: 
1. 
Envelopment: Bringing the audience into the 
atmosphere of the event 
2. 
Providing information about occurrences, not 
all of which are visible in the picture 
3. 
Supporting the picture (maintaining 
“image/sound congruency”) 
4. 
Quasi-cinematic dramatization of events  
These four main points are not mere details. The 
sound design and the arrangement of microphones 
influence the essential characteristics of a sports 
production significantly, even though the cost in 
money and personnel represents only a relatively small 
part of the total technical expenditure for a 

 
3 / 13 
Microphone Usage for Sports Broadcasting 
production. In addition, the TV viewer increasingly 
expects the kind of first-class, “hyper-real” sound 
track that Hollywood film productions offer, even if 
live sports productions may not seem to offer a 
comparable range of possibilities. 
1. Which microphone 
arrangements offer the 
greatest potential for sports 
broadcasting? 
Audio producers for the most ambitious sports 
productions, such as the World Cup soccer 
championships and the Olympics, face many difficult 
demands. Their way of using microphones is aimed 
at supporting the four main goals mentioned above. 
This does not necessarily cause great expense; a 
careful review of issues and problem areas can often 
bring about improvements without any increase in 
expense at all. The following topics in microphone 
usage will be given special consideration in this 
article: 
- 
Main microphones and ambience 
microphones (Surround/Stereo), see paragraph 
3 
- 
Ambience spot microphones (Stereo/Mono), 
see paragraph 4 
- 
Spot and effects microphones (Mono), see 
paragraph 5 
- 
Commentator pickup (Mono), see paragraph 6 
Each aspect can be optimized. Together they must 
produce an audio mix that the listener will find 
striking and informative, and that places him or her 
in the midst of the event. 
2. Main microphones and 
ambience microphones 
Main microphone arrangements or ambience 
microphone arrangements are each usually placed in a 
centralized location, though sometimes they may 
consist of several distributed single microphones. Their 
purpose is to pick up both the essential occurrences of 
a sports event as well as the atmosphere and spatial 
character of the venue. Often, each microphone is 
directly routed to a single loudspeaker, i.e. in 5.1 
surround there are 4-5 microphones for the speakers 
L, (C), R, LS, RS. 
One determining characteristic of the main 
microphone arrangement should naturally be sonic 
transparency. In every study, the fidelity of sound 
color and the avoidance of sound coloration has been 
found to be the most relevant attribute. We highly 
recommend small-diaphragm condenser microphones 
of studio quality for this reason. 
The main microphone arrangement has the following 
functions: 
a) 
Capturing the space and the atmosphere 
b) 
Enveloping the listener and bringing him into the 
environment of the event 
c) 
Formation of an underlying sonic structure that 
allows for the fitting in of signals from spot 
microphones. 
These functions can be achieved by choosing the main 
microphone geometry so that two essential factors are 
obtained: a good 360° representation of direct sound 
and a decorrelated pickup of the diffuse ambient 
components of the sound field (' see block below). 
 
 

 
4 / 13 
Microphone Usage for Sports Broadcasting 
Microphone setup geometry for ideal 360° representation 
To achieve an even distribution of sound sources between two loudspeakers, two microphones must be set up with a 
particular distance and angle between them, thus obtaining level and arrival time differences. The distance and angle 
depend on the directional pattern of the microphones. These parameters can be calculated by using the "Image Assistant“ 
at www.hauptmikrofon.de. One well-known example is the ORTF arrangement, in which two cardioid microphones are set 
with 17 cm and 110° between them. The ORTF arrangement creates an evenly spread image between the loudspeakers for 
sound sources with arrival angles between -50° and +50° of center; in other words, the stereophonic recording angle is 
100°. 
For a 5.1 surround arrangement, the same rules apply as for two-channel stereo, with each adjacent pair of microphones 
or loudspeakers being considered: L/R (or L/C + C/R), R/RS, LS/L and LS/RS. 
 
360° Imaging 
360° imaging is achieved by positioning the 
microphones so that suitable level and/or arrival time 
differences occur between each adjacent pair of 
loudspeakers in the surround environment. The decisive 
factors are the directional patterns of the microphones 
as well as their relative distances and angles. The 
relationship between microphone setup geometry and 
the resulting directional image is well known; the 
relevant principles are explained in the following block. 
A rough image can also be achieved by using separate 
microphones that are positioned distinctly far apart from 
one another. The signal separation of such microphones 
will naturally be good, but no kind of stereophonic 
image will occur between loudspeakers; the 
loudspeakers themselves will be the only points from 

 
5 / 13 
Microphone Usage for Sports Broadcasting 
which any sound sources will seem to 
originate. This increases the risk that the 
ambience will seem to be tied directly to the 
loudspeakers. 
Diffuse sound recording 
An ambience microphone picks up mainly 
diffuse sound. In a sports arena the 
predominant sound components will be 
diffuse ambience, audience sounds, 
reverberation, and where applicable, stadium 
music and motor/engine noise. Optimal 
pickup of diffuse sound, producing 
spaciousness and envelopment as well as 
inclusion of the listener, requires adequate 
separation among the signals of all the 
loudspeaker channels. Hence, they must 
present diffuse sound components that differ 
from one another. Should this not be so, the 
virtual space will collapse because the 
reverberance will seem to emanate only from 
the specific loudspeaker positions, and the 
room will sound narrow and unnatural. Each 
mono component in the main microphone 
arrangement increases the perceived, 
unwanted distance between the listener and 
the recording site. Non-diffuse (in the 
extreme case, mono) reproduction of diffuse 
sound has an effect that resembles listening through a 
small window into the space where the events are 
occurring. The following block explains the necessary 
microphone geometry for sufficient decorrelation of 
diffuse sound.  
Does the ambience microphone setup 
need the center channel? 
In ambience pickup for sports events the center channel 
is mostly used at a low level or not at all. This is partly 
because other important content already occupies the 
center channel (commentary, spot mike signals tied to 
the picture), and partly because the reproduction of 
ambience actually tends to decrease in quality when the 
center channel is included; this is due to the less optimal 
diffuse-field correlation and the energy balance between 
the front and rear.  
The ambience microphone arrangement will need to be 
significantly larger if a center-channel microphone is part 
of it, since signals of sufficient difference are required for 
the L/C and C/R speaker pairs. 
The main requirement is for a steady, low level of 
ambience in the center channel so that the commentary 
microphone can be turned off inaudibly. To meet this 
requirement, it is sufficient to create a center ambience 
signal from the sum of the L and R ambience 
microphones. 
If the center-channel signal is derived by matrixing (e.g. 
Diffuse-field correlation 
Diffuse-field correlation, along with 360° imaging, is the essential 
criterion for the configuration of ambience microphone setups for 
surround. Low diffuse-field correlation is required for optimal 
spaciousness, envelopment and inclusion of the listener. This is 
especially the case at low frequencies, which are important for the 
perception of envelopment.  
Low diffuse-field correlation can be achieved in several ways: by means 
of a sufficient angle between two directional microphones, by means 
of sufficient distance between them, or by a combination of both. 
The following "rules of thumb" can be helpful: 
- 
If a coincident setup (microphone distance = 0) is used, an ideally 
small diffuse-field correlation can be obtained only with 
supercardioids or figure-8 microphones. The supercardioids should 
be arranged at an angle of 120°, two figure-8 microphones at an 
angle of 90°. 
- 
A coincident microphone arrangement cannot produce four 
sufficiently decorrelated signals, let alone five. This is because the 
greatest possible angle will be 90° (4 * 90° = 360° or 5 * 72 = 
360°). If a coincident arrangement is used, a 4-channel mix 
(L/R/LS/RS) will sound better than 5 channels since the added 
center channel will raise the degree of diffuse-field correlation. 
- 
If omnidirectional microphones are used, they should be spaced at 
least 100 cm apart, while for directional microphones 10—20 cm 
is sufficient. 

 
6 / 13 
Microphone Usage for Sports Broadcasting 
from a Double M/S or Soundfield microphone 
arrangement), the same idea still holds: The matrixing 
should be carried out in 4-channel mode, since that will 
give a better sonic result. 
Signal Separation 
The general problem in configuring a main microphone 
system for surround recording is that the degree of 
signal separation needed both for imaging and for good 
pickup of diffuse sound cannot be achieved among four 
or five microphones placed at a single point. As a logical 
result, coincident microphone arrangements are at a 
disadvantage relative to arrangements with some space 
among the microphones.  
The spatial impression obtained with coincident main 
microphone arrangements is demonstrably narrower and 
less natural sounding. Of course coincident 
arrangements offer the great advantage of being more 
compact and simple to set up. But great care must be 
taken to maximize the signal separation. For matrixed 
systems this can be achieved through optimal 
dematrixing.  
One example of an optimal coincident system is the 
Schoeps “Double M/S” microphone arrangement with 
either the passive, fixed-parameter MDMS U matrix or 
the “Double M/S Tool” software plug-in. 
 
Checklist for main microphone configurations for 
sports events: 
Sonic characteristics  
of the main microphone 
system: 
- 
Tone color 
- 
Spaciousness, 
envelopment, sense 
of depth 
- 
Precision and 
stability of imaging 
- 
Downmix 
compatibility 
- 
etc. 
Practical characteristics 
of the main microphone 
system: 
- 
Expense 
- 
Size 
- 
Complexity 
- 
Reliability 
- 
Flexibility 
- 
Usability 
- 
etc. 
 
Spaced main microphones 
If it is allowed to space the microphones some distance 
Schoeps ORTF Surround (4ch, left) and ORTF-3D (8ch, right), both using a windscreen of the same size.  
They feature a suspension and heating as well as wind and rain protection as well as multicore cables for an easy usage. 

 
7 / 13 
Microphone Usage for Sports Broadcasting 
apart, the result will be a significant improvement in 
360° imaging particularly in the representation of diffuse 
sound. Unfortunately, there are practical disadvantages 
to this approach, since spaced microphone 
arrangements are larger and tend to be more difficult to 
set up.  
Another alleged disadvantage, however, is untrue; as 
long as the microphones are picking up signals that are 
sufficiently different from one another, spaced 
microphones bring no disadvantage whatsoever to the 
two-channel downmix. 
There are quite a few theoretically optimal arrangements 
that follow the above rules. For 5-channel pickup there 
are the Decca Tree, OCT Surround, Williams MMA and 
INA5. For 4-channel pickup there are the IRT Cross, ORTF 
Surround and the Hamasaki Square. For a 3D-Audio 
pickup there are the OCT9 (nine-channel) or the ORTF3D (8ch) setups. 
These have been used successfully for music recording. 
But some of these setups are too large and complicated 
for practical use in sports broadcasting, or the kinds of 
accessories needed for typical sporting events (e.g. 
basket-type windscreens or hanging mounts) do not 
exist.  
An exception is the ORTF series of Schoeps with the 
ORTF Stereo, ORTF Surround and ORTF-3D setups; 
accessories exist which allow it to be handled quite 
simply like a “single-point” microphone. 
Positioning the main microphone system 
The main microphone setup plays a decisive role in the 
sonic result which is obtained. The main problem is to 
find a place where an optimally balanced, symmetrical 
sound image occurs—one which coincides with the 
visual picture while being neither too far from the sound 
sources nor too close to any of them. This place must be 
reachable without undue difficulty, and there also needs 
to be some way to run cables from it. 
This is often difficult in practice. One example is in a 
soccer arena, where the microphone position that would 
be ideal from a practical standpoint—along the side of 
the pitch—is terrible from an acoustical standpoint. This 
is no surprise, since the VIP and press areas are usually 
there alongside the primary camera, and nothing that is 
acoustically very exciting happens there. (See the 
illustration of the football arena on page 10.) 
A well-balanced overall sound image is generally 
available only at a certain elevation, as with room 
microphones at a music concert. But this is scarcely 
possible at a sporting event because of the many 
cameras which would each see the 
microphones. For this reason, the main 
microphones are often suspended from the 
roof, which eases this set of problems. 
At many types of sports events, such as car 
races, it is necessary to have several 
distributed main microphone systems which 
are dynamically mixed together. If certain 
rules are followed, it is allowable for the 
acoustical perspective to shift just as the 
visual perspective shifts with a cut. This is 
possible when matching “Audio follows 
Video” techniques applied between 
picture and sound. 
Picture of two ambience microphone arrangements in a stadium (hung next 
to each other for test purposes). Shown here: Schoeps “ORTF Surround” and 
“Double M/S” 

 
8 / 13 
Microphone Usage for Sports Broadcasting 
Ambience spot miking 
Spot microphones can be placed apart from the central 
array to pick up ambient sounds which the main 
microphones or main ambience microphones do not 
adequately cover, or that the main arrays are picking up 
from an unsuitable direction. A typical example would 
be stereo spot microphones placed in front of the 
spectator sections of a soccer arena (see the illustration 
of the soccer arena on page 10). 
These microphones are intended to create a spatial 
image; thus the sound must be reproduced not as point 
sources, but across a stereophonic zone, as explained in 
the above-mentioned rules. Stereo ambience spot mikes 
really do work better than mono spot mikes, since they 
stabilize the spatial impression and localization rather 
than detracting from it. Thus they can also improve the 
“sweet spot” of the mix.  
In general, it is to the advantage of the sound quality 
when the signals routed to the various loudspeakers are 
as discrete as possible; for example, the stereo spot 
mikes at the right corner of the arena could be routed 
discretely to R and RS. The basic stereo pairs L-R, L-C, CR and LS-RS can also be provided with directionally 
stable signals from ambience spot microphones. 
Small-diaphragm microphones arranged according to 
the usual stereophonic techniques are suitable for stereo 
ambience spot miking. The main requirement is good 
separation of the signals from other channel groups; 
thus X/Y or ORTF setups are often chosen. Here, too, a 
compact, practical microphone set with the needed 
accessories is called for.  
Optimal solutions for this are the Schoeps MSTC 64 
ORTF microphone or the Schoeps “ORTF Outdoor Set.” 
3. Spot and effects miking 
Crosstalk among the spot microphones 
The four goals outlined at the beginning of this article 
require the use of decentralized, spatially separated spot 
microphones whose signals are dynamically mixed into 
the overall sound image. They may be used for brief time 
intervals; for example, the signal from a particular 
microphone might be used only in the moment when 
the player jumps into the pit.  
 
Typical setup of an ORTF stereo  
pair in the corner of the arena. 
Shown here: Schoeps MSTC 64U 
with two Schoeps BBG windscreens. 
Typical setup of an ORTF stereo pair in the corner of 
the arena. Shown here: Schoeps MSTC 64U with two 
Schoeps BBG windscreens. 

 
9 / 13 
Microphone Usage for Sports Broadcasting 
This approach works not only because it 
excludes unwanted noises; what is far more 
important is that no two microphones should 
be active if they are picking up the same 
signal. To do so would cause comb filter 
effects (“Phasing”), coloration of the sound, 
and covering of the main microphone pickup  
due to the unwanted space and ambience 
components in the spot microphones.  
To get any kind of grasp on this problem, 
sometimes a submix is made by a second 
sound engineer, e.g. for the so-called “Closeball” mix at a soccer game, only the single 
best-positioned shotgun microphone at the 
edge of the field is used. 
One significant precondition both for 
avoiding crosstalk between open 
microphones as well as for unproblematic 
mixing with the main microphone signals 
is to have a high ratio of useful to nonuseful signal in the spot microphones. The useful signal 
is the localizable sound source of the moment; the nonuseful signal could be ambient sound and/or other 
nearby localizable sound sources.  
To achieve a high ratio of useful to non-useful signals 
requires: 
- 
the shortest possible distance from the sound 
sources 
- 
optimal spacing between the directional 
microphones 
- 
as narrow as possible a pickup pattern for the 
directional microphones 
It rarely is possible to get the microphones very close to 
the sound sources, or if so, only with very crafty 
microphone positioning. Optimal microphone placement 
is often impossible for “political” reasons, or simply 
because it is impermissible for the microphones to be 
seen. In this respect there are advantages to those sports 
which permit special sensors and microphones to be 
mounted on and among the players and the sports 
apparatus. 
Optimal spacing among the shotgun microphones will 
minimize the overlap of their pickup regions, as with 
spot microphones in an orchestra. This allows the 
transition between microphones to occur inaudibly. 
Sharp directionality 
The sharpest possible directionality—a narrow lobe 
pattern—is generally achieved by using “shotgun” 
microphones such as the Schoeps CMIT 5.  
An interference tube gives these microphones a greater 
directivity at high frequencies than normal supercardioid 
microphones, but this comes at the cost of a slight 
lessening of sound quality due to angle-dependent 
frequency response. The interference tube principle 
works only at wavelengths smaller than the length of the 
tube. This means that a normal shotgun microphone is a 
supercardioid up to about 2 kHz, and the pattern 
becomes narrower only above that point.  
Typical setup of shotgun microphones on small stands at the edge of the 
playing field, in basket-type windscreens (see soccer arena graphic below) 

 
10 / 13 
Microphone Usage for Sports Broadcasting 
Longer shotgun microphones may start to increase 
directivity at ca. 500 Hz, but with greater reduction of 
sound quality. One alternative to this is to use parabolic 
reflectors, which have a supremely narrow pattern at 
high frequencies. But at low frequencies they have 
almost no directional effect, which limits their use to 
special effects such as ski noise or the sounds of 
American football. 
Very sharp directionality in a microphone is both a 
blessing and a curse. It is a blessing in that the abovementioned problems can be avoided by decreasing the 
pickup of unwanted sound. But it is a curse because a 
narrow pickup pattern causes more microphones to be 
needed within any given region to avoid gaps in the 
coverage.  
The ideal would be a microphone that has both a 
narrow front pickup pattern and also good suppression 
of diffuse sound pickup. This combination of 
characteristics has become available in the Schoeps 
digital SuperCMIT microphone, which was introduced in 
2010 and immediately passed its first major assignment 
at a large-scale sporting event with flying colors: The 
World Cup Soccer championship.  
This microphone has higher directivity than a long 
shotgun but also greater sonic neutrality, because both 
its directionality and the additional suppression of diffuse 
sound are evenly maintained across most of its 
frequency range. This is made possible by adaptive signal 
processing on the basis of two separate microphone 
capsules.  
In the meantime, the SuperCMIT it has become a 
popular solution for location sound, theatre and it has 
been used successfully for many other sporting events of 
different types—soccer, tennis, cycling and rugby among 
others. 
Use of the Schoeps SuperCMIT shotgun microphone in 
a basket-type windscreen at the edge of a football field, 
and on the camera at a boxing match 

 
11 / 13 
Microphone Usage for Sports Broadcasting 
If the intent is to create a cinema-like exaggeration of 
live sounds, this places even greater demands on the 
spot microphones. Compression of their signals increases 
harmful crosstalk among them.  
A hyper-real, exaggerated loudness and clarity of sound 
is demanded that can scarcely be obtained from 
naturally-occurring noises. 
The illustration below shows an optimal 5.1 microphone 
arrangement for soccer. Microphones with this 
positioning were used by the host broadcaster HBS at 
various football World Cups.  
Included are the main “ORTF Surround” microphone 
setup (hanging), the two stereo “ORTF Outdoor Set” 
spot microphone setups for the two curves and the 
numerous mono shotguns that were used for picking up 
the sound of the ball. 
Nowadays, the “ORTF Surround” can be replaced by the 
“ORTF-3D” in order to capture a 3D ambience signal.  
This illustration shows a relatively ambitious example of miking a soccer game.  
Additional hanging mono spot microphones can be used to cover the sound of the spectator groups. 

 
12 / 13 
Microphone Usage for Sports Broadcasting 
  
4. Commentator miking 
The commentary is an essential component of the sound 
mix and should be mentioned in this connection because 
it is often produced within the same space, causing the 
commentator microphone to pick up ambient sound 
components.  
This can sometimes lead to considerable difficulties, 
since overly strong monophonic ambient signals in the 
center channel harm the perception of a natural 
spaciousness.  
Furthermore, gaps can be heard if the commentator’s 
microphone is muted (e.g. when speaking with the 
director), which are no longer covered by the level of 
ambient sound pickup in the center channel of the main 
microphone arrangement. 
It is not easy to find a high-quality miking arrangement 
that also lives up to the practical requirements for the 
commentator. The microphone, together with the 
headphones, must form a robust headset that keeps the 
microphone positioned very close to the mouth. Some 
people resort to communications headsets, but a 
professional solution also exists which uses a smalldiaphragm studio condenser microphone:  
the Schoeps HSC 4VXP/4VP headsets.
Producing the commentary in a booth; for a Live TV show 
(Photo courtesy of “Audio2 Audiodeskription”) 

 
13 / 13 
Microphone Usage for Sports Broadcasting 
 
5. Sound for sports events – a 
complex production 
As this article shows, miking for sports events is a highly 
complex matter, and thus, as with music recording, 
there are true artists among the recording engineers.  
It quickly becomes clear that the aspects addressed here 
cover only some of the problem areas (although the 
most important ones) that occur in an actual 
assignment. All these problems are entirely real rather 
than theoretical. On the contrary, all the solutions 
described and recommended in this article came about 
without exception at the initiative of experienced 
practitioners, and are now being used by them. 
The quality of sound in a live sports broadcast has 
become the quality criterion for the broadcast as a 
whole. No one can afford to produce a substandard 
result, and the standard is constantly rising as the 
technology, technical knowledge and overall awareness 
all increase.  
Of course there are always financial and political 
constraints which may frustrate a more ambitious 
solution. But due to the top quality results at the major 
events, the awareness of the viewing audience is 
apparently becoming educated such that soon, 
inadequate sound will no longer be accepted as part of 
any sports broadcast.  
The tools for optimal 5.1 surround sound are ready for 
action. 
 
 
Commentary place in a football arena 
