
 EU Icons for labelling AI-generated content | Shaping Europe’s digital future
 Skip to main content
en
Select your languageClose
bgбългарски
esespañol
csčeština
dadansk
deDeutsch
eteesti
elελληνικά
enEnglish
frfrançais
gaGaeilge
hrhrvatski
ititaliano
lvlatviešu
ltlietuvių
humagyar
mtMalti
nlNederlands
plpolski
ptportuguês
roromână
skslovenčina
slslovenščina
fisuomi
svsvenska
SearchSearch
Shaping Europe’s digital future
MenuClose
MenuBackPrevious itemsNext items
Home
Policies
Activities
News
Library
Funding
Calendar
Consultations
AI Office
Home
…
Policies
Artificial Intelligence
European approach to artificial intelligence
Code of Practice on Transparency of AI-generated Content
EU Icons for labelling AI-generated content
EU Icons for labelling AI-generated content
 Page Contents
Page Contents
What content needs to be labelled as AI-generated or manipulated?
Limitations and exceptions
The EU icons
How to display the EU icons?
 Deployers of generative AI systems can use the EU set of icons to label certain AI-generated content, in accordance with the AI Act transparency rules.
The EU has developed a set of icons that creators, publishers and other deployers of generative AI systems may use to label their AI-generated content. These icons are freely available and a integral part of Section 2 of the Code of Practice on marking and labelling of AI-generated content.
What content needs to be labelled as AI-generated or manipulated?
The icons are intended to help natural persons exposed to such content to recognise, in a clear and distinguishable manner, that the content has been artificially generated or manipulated. This obligation supports public trust, reduces the risk of misinformation and the informed viewing and reading by natural persons of all sorts of content.
Not all AI-generated or manipulated content needs to be labelled. The disclosure requirement under the AI Act covers only AI-generated or manipulated content. The icons support compliance with Article 50(4) of the AI Act, which requires deployers of AI systems to disclose:
Deepfakes - AI-generated or manipulated image, audio, or video content that resembles existing persons, objects, places, entities or events and would falsely appear to a person to be authentic or truthful.
AI-generated or manipulated text published to inform the public on matters of public interest, which did not undergo human review or editorial control and where editorial responsibility was not assumed by any legal or natural person.
Limitations and exceptions
Evidently artistic, creative, satirical, fictional and analogous works
If deepfake content forms part of an evidently artistic, creative, satirical, fictional or analogous work or programme, the transparency obligations are limited to disclosure in an appropriate manner that does not hamper the display or enjoyment of the work.
Authorised by law
The disclosure obligation does not apply where the use of deepfakes or published text on matters of public interest is authorised by law to detect, prevent, investigate or prosecute criminal offences.
Human review or editorial control for text
The disclosure obligation does not apply where the AI-generated text has undergone a process of human review or editorial control and where a natural or legal person holds editorial responsibility for the publication of the content.  
The EU icons
The icons have 4 variations: black, white, black with 50% transparency and white with 50% transparency. Download all the icons in all variations:
SVG format (ZIP)
PNG format (ZIP)
The icons have undergone user-testing, and the results have informed their design. Notably, performance improved across all measures when the basic icon was accompanied by a text label (e.g. modified).
Icon
When to use
Use case examples
Basic icon
When AI was involved in the creation of deepfake content (image, audio, video) or published text or when a custom text label or interactive second layer is implemented
Deepfake video with the text label “voices generated with” followed by the basic icon
Fully AI-Generated
When the entire deepfake content (image, audio, video) or text is fully generated by AI with no human-created elements or human editorial control (apart from prompting)
Fully AI-generated deepfake videos with politicians or fictional events
Fully AI-composed music or art*
AI-generated news summaries
Partially AI-Modified
When pre-existing, human-made content was partially modified with AI turning it into a deepfake or text on matters of public interest 
A face in an authentic photograph is swapped with a face of a politician using AI
Authentic photographs of an empty apartment is furnished using AI 
*May enjoy limited disclosure requirements for artistic, creative, fictional or satirical works
The use of these EU icons is optional, but the labelling requirements under Article 50 AI Act are not. The use of these icons does not establish legal compliance by itself. Deployers remain responsible for ensuring that any disclosure meets the requirements of Article 50 AI Act. Signatories of the Code of Practice on marking and labelling of AI-generated content must duly implement the measures it contains.
How to display the EU icons?
Check section 2 of the Code of Practice on marking and labelling of AI-generated content for the detailed placement specifications that signatories commit to implement. For further guidance, contact the AI Act Service Desk.
Below you can find a summary, not a complete overview, of the rules to display the icons:
The icon should be clearly perceivable and distinguishable at the latest at the time of first exposure of a natural person to the deepfake or published text.
The icon should be placed where no intervening overlay elements exist.
The icon should be directly embedded into the deepfake or published text (except for creative works), unless equivalent alternatives are available such as a user interface overlay. The icon must be visible when content is reshared or downloaded.
Users of the icon are encouraged to implement accessibility measures:
The icon should be in a clearly visible size.
Any accompanying label should use plain language and avoid jargon, confusing wording and abbreviations other than “AI”.
If possible, the icon should be readable by assistive technologies using alt text or ARIA labels indicating that the content is AI-generated or manipulated.
If the disclosure appears for a limited time, it should remain visible long enough to be read and understood by users with cognitive or processing difficulties.
If additional information is provided through a second interactive layer, the icon should clearly indicate that further information is available and the second layer content shall be navigable using assistive technologies.
Licence
These icons are made publicly available for everyone to use freely, without the need for attribution to the Commission or the AI Office. However, signatories of the code of practice should use the icon in accordance with its placement specifications. Usage of these icons by non-signatories of the code should not be construed as signaling of their adherence to the code.
Quick Links
 How to sign the Code of Practice on transparency of AI-generated content 
 Questions & Answers - Signing the Code of Practice on transparency of AI-Genera… 
 Questions & Answers - Code of Practice on Transparency of AI-Generated Content 
 Guidelines on Transparency of AI-Generated Content 
Related Content
Big Picture
 Code of Practice on Transparency of AI-generated Content
This code of practice supports compliance with the AI Act transparency obligations related to marking and labelling of AI-generated content.
Last update
24 September 2026
 Print as PDF 
Shaping Europe’s digital future
This site is managed by:
Directorate-General for Communications Networks, Content and Technology
Digital EU on Mastadon
Digital EU on LinkedIn
Digital EU on Facebook
Digital EU on Youtube
Digital EU on Instagram
Digital EU on X
 About us 
Privacy statement
Copyright notice
About Directorate-General CONNECT
Language Policy
Follow the European Commission
Mastodon
LinkedIn
Bluesky
Facebook
Youtube
Other
Contact us
Report an IT vulnerability
Languages on our websites
Cookies
Privacy policy
Legal notice
Accessibility
