Fuente: Sessions College, «Color Wheel - Color Calculator», https://www.sessions.edu/color-calculator/
Modificada (metadato article:modified_time): 2025-05-01. Descargada: 29-09-2026. Extracto: de «What is the Color Wheel?» a «Adjust Color Value and Saturation».
Se presenta como «an accredited, fully online school of art and design» (pie de la misma página).

What is the Color Wheel? 
 The color wheel is a chart that represents the relationships between colors. Artists and designers use it to choose sets of colors that work well together. It typically includes primary colors (red, yellow, and blue), secondary colors, and tertiary colors. Sir Isaac Newton first created it in 1666. 
 Newton’s colour wheel serves many purposes today. Painters use it to choose colors to mix. Designers use it to pick colors for their projects. The classic color wheel arranges hues in a circle, connected by lines or shapes. Secondary colors are created by mixing primary colors. For example, mixing red and yellow creates orange. Mixing yellow and blue creates green. 
 Colors in the color wheel: 
 Primary colors: Red, yellow, blue 
 Secondary colors: Orange, green, violet 
 Tertiary colors: Yellow green, blue green, blue violet, red violet, red orange, yellow orange 
 Color Theory: Build Color Schemes 
 Designers often start a project by creating a color scheme . That’s a set of colors that will work well together for a client, task, or project. You can start from scratch, but generally you’ll start with one or two base colors, then build the other colors around them. Learn more about color harmony and color schemes in our guide: Intro to Color Harmony and in our online color theory course: Color Theory 4017 . 
 Use Color Harmony to Create Color Themes 
 How to choose colors that really work? Use the color wheel (also called a color calculator) to find working color combinations. The color harmonies below are based on geometric relationships on the color wheel. That’s why we show them as shapes. Rotate the shapes around the central point of the color wheel picker to create limitless color combinations. Then export them with the color palette generator. 
 Complementary color schemes use two opposite colors on the color wheel, like blue and orange for high contrast. 
 Monochromatic color schemes use three different values of the same color, like light, medium, and dark blue. 
 Analogous color schemes use three adjacent colors on the color wheel, like red, orange, and yellow to add harmony. 
 Split complements use a color and the two adjacent tertiary colors of its complement, like green, red-orange, and red-violet. 
 Triadic color schemes use three evenly spaced colors on the color wheel, like red, yellow, and blue. 
 Tetradic color schemes use two complementary pairs like red and green for dynamic designs. 
 Choose the Right Colors 
 Be creative and experiment to find the right color palette for your project. Bear in mind that color is very psychological, and different color harmonies produce different effects. For example, analogous colors are similar in hue, creating a smooth transition from one color to the next. Complementary colors are opposite to each other on the color wheel picker, so they create strong contrast. Monochromatic color schemes can be subtle and sophisticated. 
 Experiment with different harmonies to achieve the desired mood or effect. 
 Learn more about analogous colors in our guide: The Dynamics of the Analogous Color Scheme 
 In this magazine spread from Martha Stewart magazine, for example, an analogous color scheme creates a gentle transition from yellow to yellow-green to green. It’s pleasing to the eye. 
 In this color scheme, the pinks and oranges are the lightest values, contrasting with the dark lettering. 
 