 
 -->
 AS-11 | AMWA – home of JT-DMF & NMOS 
 top of page 
 Specs
 Contact
 JT-DMF
 JT-DMF 
 DMF Supporters 
 DMF Supporter – Apply 
 NMOS
 Getting Started with NMOS 
 What's NMOS 
 NMOS Course 
 NMOS for Pro AV and IPMX 
 NMOS FAQs 
 NMOS Specs 
 NMOS-controlled Products 
 Specs
 AS-11 Specs 
 NMOS Specs 
 Join
 Why Join AMWA? 
 Join-Principal 
 Join-General 
 Join-Associate 
 Join-Individual 
 Contact
 Blog
 About
 Members
 AAF
 MXF
 Agile Media
 Certification
 Developers
 Reference
 Brochures
 Videos
 Logos
 Bylaws and Policies
 Policy Docs
 Licenses
 ...
 Use tab to navigate through the menu items.
 Join 
 JT-DMF and NMOS
open specifications and collaboration 
 AS-11: Media Contribution File Formats
 ​ 
 The AMWA AS-11 family of Specifications define constrained media file formats (based on MXF) for the delivery of finished media assets to a broadcaster or publisher.  Each Specification is developed for a particular business purpose.
 The AS-11 Overview GitHub project is used to host additional resources for all the AS-11 Specifications including an issue tracker, sample files, tools, and more information.
 ​ 
 History of AS-11 development 
 The AS-11 UK DPP HD & SD Specifications are well established for the delivery of finished programs to media companies within the UK.
 Traditionally, AMWA Specifications have been text-based.  While being easily human-readable, they do not support automated processes or allow the Specification to be quickly and efficiently adapted for new users.  This has led to the development of Rules-based, machine-readable Specifications.  Building blocks (“rules”) for all the video, audio, metadata, etc aspects are combined into the final Specification.  Human-readable descriptions can be generated automatically from the machine versions, and these building blocks can be re-used in other Specifications.
 This new approach has proven especially valuable as the AS-11 family of Specifications has been extended to accommodate the needs of new international users.  New specifications have been created to:
 Meet the requirements of broadcasters in the Nordic countries, Australia and New Zealand, as well as broadcasters represented by the North American Broadcasters Association (NABA) and the DPP
 Add support for UHD and HDR content
 Cater for delivery of short-form content in addition to full-length programs (such as commercials, promotions, and music videos)
 ​ ​
 PRIVACY NOTICE | SITE MAP  
 Copyright © 2026 AMWA – Advanced Media Workflow Association. All rights reserved.
 Stay in touch! Sign up for AMWA enews here. 
 bottom of page 

