LTO Program, «LTO Generation Compatibility Details», https://www.lto.org/lto-generation-compatibility/ — leída el 25-09-2026 (curl, HTML a texto).

 LTO Generation Compatibility Details | LTO Ultrium Subscribe to Newsbytes Licensee Login Contact Us Search 
for: ABOUT LTO What is LTO Technology? Benefits of LTO Technology LTO Technology Use Cases FAQs about LTO 
Technology LTO Technology Participants LTO TECHNOLOGY Roadmap LTO Generation 8 LTO Generation 9 LTO 
Generation 10 LTO Compatibility Linear Tape File System Encryption Active Archiving Sustainability 
Cybersecurity NEWS Latest Headlines NewsBytes BlogBytes Analyst and Media Quotes Press Releases Press Release 
Archive RESOURCES INSIC Roadmap 2024 Podcasts & Webinars Videos White Papers and Reports Case Studies 
Superhero Ebook LICENSING Licensing Process Licensee Login Select Page LTO GENERATION COMPATIBILITY &#x3b; 
Proprietary storage systems don’t give you a lot of options when you want to transfer data. They can lock 
you into a system that can be more expensive and lacking innovation. How the LTO format works That’s why 
LTO specifications are open format, designed for interoperability from among multiple competing vendors. 
These vendors submit their products to compatibility testing to ensure vendor functionality so that an LTO 
technology from one vendor can be used on a drive provided by another. It’s become the de-facto standard 
for medium-tier storage needs. Protecting your investment Most importantly, the LTO format ensures that your 
investment today will continue to pay off for years to come. LTO specifications provide backwards 
compatibility to read/write with previous generations.   LTO drive generations 1-7 are able to read tapes 
from two generations prior and are able to write to tapes from the prior generation.   LTO-8 drives can read 
and write to LTO-7 and LTO-8 media, including LTO-7 Type M.   LTO-9 drives can read and write to LTO-8 and 
LTO-9 media only.   LTO-10 drives can only read and write to LTO-10 media. But they support both 30 TB and 
40 TB LTO-10 media interchangeably. With a published roadmap, LTO technology allows you to better forecast 
how to address your future technology as you consider your needs today. Linear Tape File System And with the 
Linear Tape File System (LTFS), LTO technology options are more compatible than ever before. There’s no 
need for a proprietary system to locate that document or video file that you’re searching for. LTFS makes 
it easy and simple. It’s open source and open standard, meaning that it’s broadly available regardless of 
which brand of LTO technology that you’re using. Today, LTO technology provides the confidence that the 
file you save can be accessed by a broad range of partners for years to come. That’s the LTO difference. 
LTO Ultrium Roadmap Hewlett Packard Enterprise Company, International Business Machines Corporation and 
Quantum Corporation collaborate and support technology specifications, licensing, and promotions of LTO 
Ultrium products. © 1999 – 2026 Hewlett Packard Enterprise, IBM and Quantum. All rights reserved. 
Information subject to change without prior notice. All trademarks and registered trademarks contained herein 
are the property of their respective owners. Linear Tape-Open LTO, the LTO logo, Ultrium and the Ultrium logo 
are registered trademarks of Hewlett Packard Enterprise, IBM and Quantum in the US and other countries. 
Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Sitemap Press Releases X RSS This website uses cookies to ensure you get the 
best experience on our website. GOT IT! LEARN MORE 
